                                                                                      I




             594          SUPREME COURT REPORTS                            [1950}
 1950                             ROMESH THAPPAR
                                              I/.
May26.
                           THE STATE OF MADRAS
                    [SHR1 HAR1LAL KANIA C. J., SA1Y1D FAZL Au,
                     PATANJALI ~ASTRI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN,
                             MuKHERJEA and DAs JJ.]
                  Constitution of India, Art. 19, els. {I) (a) and (2), 32-Appli-
             cation under Art. 32-Preliminary ob1ection-Fundamental right of
             freedom of speech and expression-Law imposing restrictions for
             securing public order and maintenance of public safety-Validity--
             Seuerability of Act-Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act
             tXXXIll of 1949), s. 9 ( 1-A)-Validity.
                  Held, by the Full Court (i) (overruling o preliminary objections)
            -TJnder the Constitution the Supreme Court is constituted the
            protector and guarantor of fundamental rights, and it cannot, con·
            sistently with the responsibility so laid upon it, refuse to entertain
            applications seeking prota:tion against infringement of such right$,.
            although such applications are made to the Court in the first
            instance without resort to a High Court having concurrent juris-dic-
            tion in the matter.
                 Urguhar v. Brown (205 U. S. 179.) and Hooney v. Kolohan
            (294 U. S. 103) distinguished.
                      (ii) Freedom of speech and expression includes freedom of
           propogation of ideas and that freedom is ensured by the freedom
           of circulation.
                 Ex parte /ackson (96 U. S. 727) and Lovell v. City of Griffin
           (303 U. S. 444) referred to.
                 Held per KANIA C. J., PATANJAL.I SAsTRJ, MEHR CttAND
           MAHAJAN, MuKHERJEA and DAs IJ.-(FAzL Au J. dissenting):
           (i) Apart from libel, slander etc. unless a law restricting freedom
          of speech and expressiofi is directed solely against the undermin-
          ing of the: st:curity of the State or the overthrow of it, such law
          cannot fall within the reservation under cl. (2) of the Art. 19 of the
          Constitution, although the restrictions \vhich it seeks to impose may
          have been conceived generally in the interests of public order. Sec-
          tion 9 0-A) of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, XXXlll
          of 1949, which authorises impositions of restrictions for the wider
          purpose of securing public safety or the maintenance of public
         order falls outside the scope of authorised restrictions under cl. (2)
         and is therefore void and unconstitutional; (ii) Where a la\\' pur-
         ports to authorise the imposition of restrictions on a fundamental
         right in langauge wide enough to cover restrictions both within
         and without the limits of constitutionally permissible legislative
         actiOft. affecting such right, it is not possible to uphold it even so I
         far as it may be applied within the constitutional limits, as it is1
         not severable. So long as the possibility of its being applied      for
         purposes not sanctioned by the Constitution cannot be ruled o~
· S.C.R.                 SUPREME- COURT REPORTS                                   595

it must  be held to be wholly unconstitutional and void. Section                             1950
9 (1-A) is therefore wholly unconstitutional and void.
        Per FAZL Au J.-Rcstrictions which s. 9 (1-A) authorised                         Ramesh Thappar.
arc within the provisions of cl. (2) of art. 19 of the Constitution                            v.
and s. 9 (1-A) is not therefore uncoqstitutional or void. (1)                             The Stat• a}
    Brij BhuJhan and Another v. The State (1950) S.C.R. 60)                                 Madras.
referred to.                            .    .
   ·ORIGINAL Ju&Is01c110N: Petition No. XVI of 1950.
 Application under article 32 of the Constitution for a.
 writ of prohibition and certiorari. The facts are set
 out in the judgment.
     C. R. Pattabhi Ra1nan, for the petitioner.
     K. Rajah Ayyar, Advocate-Gene;al of Madras, (Gana-
 pathi Ayyar, with him) fQr the opposite party.
     1950. May 26. The Judgment of Kania C. J., Mehr
 Chand ~1ahajan, Mukherjea and Das JJ. Was delivered
 by Patanjali Sastri, J. Fazl Ali. J. delivered a separate
 judgment.
     PATANJALI SASTRI J.-The petitioner is the printer,
                                                                                           Patanjali
 publisher and editor of a recently started weekly                                         Sast1iJ.
 journal in English called Cross. Roads printed and
 published in Bombay. The Government of Madras,
  the respondents herein, in exercise of their powers
  under section 9(1-A) of the Madras Maintenance of
 Public Order Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the
 impugned Act) purported to issue an order No. MS.
  1333 dated 1st March, 1950, whereby they imposed · a
  ban upon the entry and circulation of the journal in
 that State. The order was published in the Fort St.
 George Gazette and the notification ran as follows :-
     "In exercise of the powers conferred by section 9
  (1-A) of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order, Act,
 1949 (Madras Act XXlII of 1949) His Excellency the
 Governor of Madras, being satisfied that for the purpose
 of securring the public safety and the maintenance of
 puolic order, it is necessary so to do, hereby prohibits,
 with effect on and from the, date of publication of this
 order in the Fort St. George Gazette the entry into or
 the circulation, sale or distribution in the State of Madras
 or any part thereof of the newspaper entitled Cross
  Roads an English weekly published at Bombay."
    The petitioner cl;iims that the said order contravenes
   the fundamental right of the petitioner to freedom of
   . ( 1)   Sec the .headnote to Brij Bhus.%an v. The Stale of Delhi, p. 60~ Infra.
 6-5 S. C. India 1N.Dl 58
                   596             SUPREME COURT REPORTS                       l1950]
      1950         speech and expression conferred on him by article 19
                   ( 1) (a) of the Constitution and he challenges the valid-
R...,sh 1'happar
       v.
                   ity of section 9 (1-A) of the· impugned Act as being
  T "- Slau of
                   void und~r article 13 ( 1) of the Constitution by reason
    Madras.        of its being inconsistent with his fundamental right
                   aforesaid.
   Palanjali
   Sastri].           The Advocate-General of Madras appearmg on be-
                   half of the respondents raised a prelimmary objection,
                   not indeed to the jurisdiction of this Court to entertain
                   the application under article 32, but to the petitioner
                   resorting to this Court directly for such relief in the
                   first instance. He contended that, as a matter of
                   orderly procedure, the petitioner should first resort to
                   the High Court at Madras which under article 226 of
                   the Constitution has concurrent jurisdiction to deal
                   with the matter. He cited criminal revision petitions
                   under section 435 ot the Criminal Procedure Code,
                   applications for bail and applications for transfer
                   under section 24 of the Civil Procedure Code as in-
                   stances where, concurrent jurisdiction having been
                   given in certain matters to the High Court and the
                   Court of a lower grade, a rule of practice has been
                   established that a party should proceed first to the
                   latter Court for relief before resorting to the High
                   Court. He referred to Emperor v. Bishes11Jar Prasad
                   Sinha( 1 ) where such a rule of practice was enforced in
                   a criminal revision case, and called our attention also
                   to certain American decisions Urquhart v. Brown(')
                   and Hooney v. Kolohan( ') as showing that the
                   Supreme Court of the United             States ordinarily
                   required· that whatever judicial remedies· remained
                   open to the applicant in Federal . ancl State Courts
                    should be exhausted before the remedy            in the
                    Supreme Court-be it habeas corpus or certiorari-
                    would be allowed. We are of opinion that neither the
                    instances mentioned by the learned Advocate-General
                   nor the American decisions referred to by him are
                   really analogous to the remedy afforded by article 32 of
                    the Indian Constitution. That article does not merely
                   confer power on this Court, as article 226 does on the
                   (') I. L, R. 56 All. l58.   i'j 20s u. 5. 179.   (') 294 U.S. W
S.C.R.               . SUPREME COURT REPORTS              597
                                                                     1930
High Courts, to issue certain writs for the enforcement
of the rights conferred by Part III or for any other            Romesh T happar
purpose, as part of its general jurisdiction.    In that              v.
case it· would have been more appropriately placed                The Stale of
among articles 131 to 139 which define that jurisdic-               Madras.
tion. Article 32 provides a "guaranteed" remedy for
the enforcement of those rights, and this remedial right           Patanjali
is itself made a fundamental right by being included in            Sastri, J.
Part UL This Court is thus constituted the protector
and guarantor of fundamental rights, and it cannot,
consistently with the responsibility so laid upon it,
refuse to entertain     applications seeking protection
again.~t infringements of such rights. No similar pro-
 vision is to be found in the Constitution of the United
 States and we do not consider that the American
decisions are in point.

    Turning now to the merits, there can be no doubt
that freedom of speech and expression includes freedom
of propagation of ideas, and that . freedom is ensurt:d / by
 the freedom of circulation. "Liberty of circulation is
as esscn tia I to that freedom as the liberty of publica-
 tion. Indeed,      without    circulation the  publication
 would be of little value". Ex parte fackso11(1 ). Sec
also Lovell v. City of Griffin( 2 ). It is therefore per-
 fectly clear that the order of the Government of Madras
 would be a Yiolation of the petitioner's fundamental
 right under article 19(1) (a), unless section 9 (I-A) of
 the impugned Act under which it was made is saved
 by the reservations mentioned in clause (2) of article 19
 w!iich (omitting immaterial words regarding laws relat-
 ing to libel, slander, etc., with which we are not con-
 cemed in this case) saves the operation of any "exist-
 ing law in so far as it relates to any matter which
 undermines the security of, or tends to overthrow, the
 State." The question accordingly arises whether the
 impugned Act, in so far as it purpo:-ts by section 9(1-A)
 to authorise the Provincial Government "for the pur-
  pose of ''ecming the public safety or tlie maintenance
·of public order, to prohibit or regulate the entry into

 ( 1)   96   u,s. 727.                      (') 303 U.S. 444.
                  598        SUPREME COURT REPORTS                    [ 1950]
     1950         or the circulation, sale or distribution in the Province of
                  Madras or any part thereof of any document or class
Ronush T happar
      v.
                  of documents" is a "law relating. to any matter which
  Tiu State of
                  undermines the security of or tends to overthrow the
    Madras.
                  State."
                    . The impugned Act was passed by the Provincial
  Patanjali       Legislature in exercise of the power conferred upon it by
 Sastri, J.
                  section 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935, read
                  with Entry I of List II of the Seventh Schedule to
                  that Act, which comprises among other matters,
                  "public order." Now "public order" is an expression
                  of wide connotation and signifies that state of tranquil-
                  lity which prevails among titc members of a political
                  society as a result of the internal regulations enforced
                  by the government which they have established.
                  Although section 9 (1-A) refers to "securing the public
                  safety" and "the maintenance of public order" as
                  distinct purposes, it must be taken that "public safety"
                  is used as a part of the wider concept of public order,
                  for, if public safety were intended to signify any matte1
                  distinct from and outside the content of the expres-
                  sion "public order," it would not have been competent
                  for the Madras Legislature to enact the provision so
                  far as it relates to public safety. This indeed was not
                  disputed on behalf of the respondents. But it was
                   urged that the expression "public safety" in the im-
                  pugned      Act, which is a statute relating to law
                  and order, means the security of the Province, and,
                  therefore, "the security of the State" within the meaning
                  of article 19 (2) as "the State" has been defined in
                  article 12 as including, among other things, the Govern-
                  ment and the Legislature of each of the erstwhile Pro-
                  vinces. Much reliance was placed in support of this
                   view on Rex v. Wormwood Scrubbs Prison(') where it
                  was held that the phrase "for securing the public. safe-
                  ty and the defence of the realm" in section I of the
                  Defence of the Realm (Consolidation) Act, 1914, was
                   not limited to securing the c~untry against a foreign
                   foe but included also protection against internal dis-
                   order such as a rebellion. The decision is not of
                   much assistance to the respondents as the context in
                               (') L.R. [1920] 2 K.B. 305.
 S.C.R.        SUPREME COURT REPORTS                   599

which the words "public safety" occurred in that Act                1950
showed unmistakably that the security of the State
                                                              Romnh T hap/HJt
was the aim in view. Our attention has not been                     v.
drawn to any definition of the expression "public               The S1aJe of
safety," nor does it appear that the words have ac-               Madras.
quired an.y technical signification as words of art.
                                                                 PaJanjali
     "Public safety" ordinarily means security of the            Sastri, J.
  public or their freedom from danger. In that sense,
  anything which tends to prevent dangers to public
  health may also be regarded as securing ,public safety.
. The meaning of the expression must, however, vary
  according to the context. In the classification of offen-
  ces in the Indian Penal Code, for instance, Chapter XIV
  enumerates the "offences affecting the public health,
  safety, convenience, decency, and morals" and it
  includes rash driving or riding on a public way (sec-
  tion 279) and rash navigation of a vessel (section 280),
  among others, as offences against public safety, while
  Chapter VI lists waging war against the Queen (section
  121), sedition (section 124-A) etc. as "offences against
  the State", because they are calculated to undermine
  or affect the security of the State, and Chapter. VIII
   defines "offences against the public tranquillity"
  which include unlawful assembly (section 141) rioting
   (section 146), pr~moting enmity between classes
  (section 153-A), affray (section 159) etc. Although in
  the context of a statute relating to law and order
  "securing public safety" may not include the securing
  of public health, it may well mean securing the public
  against rash driving on a public way and the like, and
  not necessarily the security of the State. It was said
  that an enactment which provided for drastic remedies
  like preventive detention and ban on newspapers must
 be taken to relate to matters affecting the security of
  the State rather than trivial offences like rash driving
 or an affray. But whatever ends the impugned Act.
  may have been intended to subserve, and whatever
 aims its framers may have had in view, its application
 and scope cannot, in the absence of limiting words in
 the statute itself, be restricted to those aggravated
 forms of prejudicial activity which are calculated to
                 600            SUPREME COURT REPORTS                f1950l
     1950        endanger the security of the State. Nor is there any
                 guarantee that those authorised to exercise the powers
Ro""'h Thappar
      v.
                 under the Act will in using them discriminate between
  The Stall of
                 those who act prejudicially to the security of the State
    Madras.      and those who do not.

  Patanjali
                    The Government of India Act, 1935, nowhere used
  Sastri, J.     the expression "security of the State" though it made
                 provision under section 57 for dealing with crimes of
                 violence intended to overthrow the Government.
                 While the administration of law and order including
                 the maintenance of public order was placed in charge
                 of a Minister elected by the people, the Governor was
                 entrusted with the responsibility of combating the
                 operations of persons who "endangered the peace or
                 tranquillity of the Province" by committing or at-
                 tempting "to commit "crimes of violence intended to
                 overthrow the Government."' Similarly, article 352
                 of the Constitution empowers the President to make a·.
                 Proclamation of Emergency when he is satisfied that
                 the "security of India or any part of the territory thereof
                 is thr~atene<l by war or bv external aggression or by
                 internal    disturbance."  These    provisions    recognise
                 that disturbance of public peace or tranquillity may
                 assume such grave proportions as to threaten the secu-
                 rity of the State.
                    As Stephen in his Criminal Law of England ( 1 ) ob-
                 serves :    "Unlawful assemblies, riots, insurrections,
                 rebellions, levying of war, are offences which run into
                 each other and are not capable of being marked off by
                 perfectly defined boundaries. All of them have in
                 common one feature, namely, that the normal tran-
                 quillity of a civilised society is in each of the cases
                 mentioned disturbed either by actual force or at least
                 bv the show and threat of it." Though all these
                 offences thus involve disturbances of public tranqua.
                 lity and are in theory offences ·against public order,
                 the difference between them being only a difference of
                 degree, yet for the purpose of grading the punishment
                 to be inflicted in respect of them they may be classified
                 into different minor categories as has been done by
                 (')Vol. TT, p. 242.
S.C.R.              SUPREME COURT REPORTS              601
the Indian Penal Code. Similarly, the Constitutiop.,               1950
in formulating the varying criteria for permissible
                                                              llomesh ThaptmT
legislation imposing restrictions on the fundamental
                                                                    v.
rights enumerated in article 19 (1), has placed in a
                                                                The Stale oj
distinct category those offences against public order             Madras.
which aim at undermining the security of the State or
overthrowing it, and made their prevention the sole              Patlllijali
justification for legislative abridgement of. freedom of         Sastri, ].
speech and expression, that is to say, nothing lcrs than
endangering the foundations of the State or threaten-
ing its overthrow could justify curtailment · of the
rights to freedom of speech and expression, while the
right of peaceable assembly "sub-clause (b )" and the
 right of association "sub-clause ( c)" may be restricted
 under clauses ( 3) and ( 4) of article 19 in the interests
of "public order", which in those clauses includes the
security of the State. The differentiation is also
noticeable in Entry 3 of List Ill (Concurrent List)
of the Seventh Schedule, which refers to the "security
of a State" and "maintenartce . ·of public order". as.
distinct subjects of legislation. Th~ Constit~tio~ thus
requires a line to be drawn in the field of public order
or tranquillity marking off, may be, roughly, the boun-
dary between those serious and aggravated forms of
public disorder which are calculated to endanger the
security of the State and the relatively minor breaches
of the peace of a purely local significance, treating for
this purpose differences in degree as if they were
differences in kind.

    It is also worthy of note that the word "sedition"
 which occurred in article ,13 (2) of the Draft Constitu-
 tion prepared by the· Drafting Committee was
deleted before the article was finally passed as
 article 19 (2). In this connection it may be
recalled that the Federal Court had, in defining sedition
in Niharendtt Dutt Majumdar v. The King Em-
peror( 1 ), held that "the acts or words complained of
must either incite to disorder or must be such as to
satisfy reasonable men that that is their intention or
tendency'', but the Privy Council overruled that
  (1)   [1912] F.C.R. 38.
                602               SUPREME COURT REPORTS                              [1950]
    1950
                  decision and emphatically reaffirmed the view express-
                  ed in Tilak's case( 1 ) to the effect that "the offence
     v.           consisted ·in exciting or attempting to excite in others
Tlw S<a1< ef      certain bad feelings towards the Government and not
  Matku.          in exciting or attempting to excite mutiny or rebellion,
                  or any sort of actual disturbance, great or small"-·
 P°'flllia/i      King Emperor v. Sadashiv Narayan Bhalerao (').
 Sanri, ].        Deletion of the word "sedition" from the draft
                 article 13 (2), therefore, shows that criticism of
                 Government exciting disaffection or bad feelings to-
                 wards it is not to be regarded as a justifying ground
               . for restricting the freedom of expression and of the
                 press, unless it is such as to undermine the security of
                 or tend to overthrow the State. It is also significant
                 that the corresponding Irish formula of "undermin-
                 ing the public order or the authority of the State"
                 [article 40 (6) (i) of the Constitution of Eire, 1937] did
                 not apparently find favour with the framers of the
                 Indian Constitution. Thus, very narrow and stringent
                 limits have been set to permissible legislative abridge-
                 ment of the right of free speech and expression, and
                 this was doubtless due to the realisation that freedom
                 of speech and of the press lay at the foundation of all
                 democratic organisations, for without free political
                 discussion no public education, so essential for the
                 proper functioning of the processes of popular govern-
                 ment, is pos,ible. A freedom of such amplitude might
                involve risks of abuse. But the framers of the
                Constitution may well have reflected, with Madison
                who was "the leading spirit in the preparation of the
                First Amendment of the Federal Constitution," that
                "it is better to leave a few of its noxious branches to
                their luxuriant growth, than, by pruning them away,
                to injure the vigour of those yielding the proper
                fruits": [Quoted in Near v. Mi1111esotta (')].

                 We are therefore of opinion that unless a law restrict-
               ing freedom of speech '11<1 expression is directed solely
               against the undermining of the security of the State or
               the overthrow of it, such law cannot fall within the
               reservation under clause (2) of article 19, although the
                 ( 1)   22 Botn. 112.   (z) L.R. 74 I. ..\. $9.   ·') 282 U.S. 607. 717-8
S.C.R.               SUPREME COURT REPORTS              603
                                                                       1950
restrictions which it seeks to impose may have been
conceived generally in the interests of public order. It
                                                               Romesh T happat
follows that section 9 (1-A) which authorises imposi-                  V.
tion of restrictions for the wider purpose of securing           The Slate of
public safety or the maintenance of public order falls             Madras.
outside the scope of authorised restrictions under
clause (2), and is therefore void and unconstitutional.           Patanjali
                                                                  Sastri, ].
    It was, however, argued that section 9 (1-A) could
 not he considered wholly void, as, under article 13(1 ),
 an existing law inconsistent with a fundamental right
 is void only to the extent of the inconsistency and no
 more. · In so far as the securing of the public safety or
 the maintenance of public order would include the
 security of the State, the impugned provision, as
 applied to the latter purpose, was covered by
 clause (2) of article 19 and must, it was said, be held
to he valid. We are unable to accede to this conten-
tion. 'Vhere a law purports to authorise the imposi-
tion of restrictions on a fundamental right in language
wide enough to cover restrictions both within and
without     the lirpits of constitutionally      permissible
legislative action affecting_ such right, it is not possible
to uphold it even so far as if may be applied within
the constitutional limits, a:s it is not severable. So
long as the possibility of its being applied for purposes
not sanctioned by the Constitution cannot be ruled out,
it must be held to be wholly unconstitutional and void.
In other words, clause (2) of article 19 having allow-
ed the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of
speech and expression only in cases· where danger to
the State is involved, an enactment, which is capable
of being applied to cases where no such danger could
arise, cannot be held to be constitutional and valid to
any extent.
   The application is therefore allowed and the order
of the respondents prohibiting the entry and circula-
tton of the petitioner's journal in the State of Madras
is hereby quashed.
                                                                Fa~l   Ali ].
  FAZL Au J.-For  the reasons given by me in B1'ij
Bhushan and Another v. The State( t ), which practically
    ( 1)   [19:0] S.C.R. 601.
                  604               SUPREME COURT REPORTS           [1950}
                  involves the same question as is involved in this case,.
Ronush Thappar
                  I hold that the reliefs sought by the petitioner cannot
       v.         be granted. In this view, I would dismiss this .peti-
  Ti.. Sia/I of   tion, but I should like to add a few observations to
    Madras.       supplement what I have said in the other case.
  Fad Ali,].         It appears to me that in the ultimate analysis the
                  real question to be decided in this case is whether
                    "disorders involving menace to the peace and tran-
                  quillity of the Province" and ailecting "public safety"
                  will be a matter which undermines the security of the
                  State or not. I have borrowed the words quoted
                  within inverted commas from the preamble of the Act
                  which shows its scope and necessity and the question
                  raised before us attacking the validity of the Act
                  must be formulated in the manner I have suggested.
                  If the answer to the question is in the affirmative, as
                  I think it must be, then the impugned law which
                  prohibits entry into the State of Madras of "any
                  document or class of documents" for securing public
                  safety and maintenance of··public order ,,hould satisfy
                  the requirements laid down in article 19 (2) of the
                  Constitution. From the trend of the arguments ad-
                  dressed to us, it would appear that if a document is
                  seditious, its entry could be validly prohibited, be-
                  cause sedition is a matter which undermines the
                  security of the State ; but if, on the other hand, the
                  document is calculated to disturb public tranquillity
                  and affect public safety, its entry cannot be prohibited,
                  because public disorder and disturbance of public
                  tranquillity are not matters which undermine the
                  security of the State. Speaking for myself, I cannot
                  understand this argument. In Brij Bhushan and
                  Another v. The State( 1 ), I have quoted good authority
                  to show that sedition owes its gravity to its tendency to
                  create disorders and an authority on criminal law
                  like Sir James Stephen has classed sedition as an
                  offence against public tranquillity. If so, how could
                  sedition be a matter which would undermine the secu-
                  rity of the State and public disorders and disturbance
                  of public safety will not be such a matter? It was
                  argued that a small riot or a affray will not
                  ( 1)   [19;0) S.C.R. 605.
       S.C.R.           SUPREME COURT REPORTS                           605
       undermine the security of the State, but to this line of                      1950
       argument there is a two-fold answer :-
                                                                               Romtsh T hap/HJ•
          ( 1) The Act, as its preamble shows, is not intended                       v.
       for petty disorders but for disorders involving menace                    The Stau qf
       to the peace and tranquillity of the Province, (2) There                    Madras.
       arc degrees of gravity in the offence of sedition also
       ahd an isolated piece of writing of mildly seditious                      Faz.I Ali,].
       character by one insignificant individual may not also,
       frotn the layman's point of view, be -a matter which
       undermines the securitv of the State, but that would
       not affect the law whi~h aims at checking sedition. It
       was also said that the law as it stands may be mis-
       used by the State executive, but misuse of the law is
       one thing and its being unconstitutional is another.
       We are here concerned with the latter aspect only. I
       shall not pursue the matter further as I have said
       enough on the subject in the connected c~se.
                                           Petition allotved.
         Agent for the petitioner :-K. /. Kale.
                                                                                   1950
        Agent for the opposite party :-P. A. Mehta.                               May 26.


                   BRIT BHUSHAN AND ANOTHER
                                        ti.

                        THE STATE OF DELHI.
                [SHRI HARILAL KANIA C.J., SAIYID FAZL Au,
                 PATANJALI SASTRI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN,
                         MuxHERJEA and DAs JJ.J
           Constitution of India. A1·t. 19. els. (I )(a) and (2)-Fundamental
      right of freedom of speech and expreuion-Law imposing pre-censor-
     ship on newspapers for securing public safety and preventing public
     disorder-Validity-Matter disturbing public safety or causing pub-
     lic disorder, whether "undermines the secut·ity of, or tends to over-
     throw, the State"-Scope of Art. 19. cl. (2)-East Punjab Public
     Safety Act, 1949, sec. 7 (I) (c)-Validity.
          Section 7 (I) ( c) of the East Punjab Public Safety Act, 1949,
 )   as extended to the Province of Delhi provided that "the Provin-
-!   cial Government or any authority authorised by it in this behalf,
     if satisfied that such action is necessary for preventing· or combat-
     ing any activity prejudicial to the public safety or the mainten-
     ance of public order may, by order in writing adGresscd to a
     printer, publisher or editor require that any matter relating to a
