                                                                                   I
                             SUPREME COURT REPORTS                    [1951)
    l~l
                that the common ancestor owned the land and that his
Ari•v,S>atli    sons got it from him ht inheritance in equal shares.
x.,••, $in(jh
 ONIQl!wr1.         The District Judge was obviously wrong when he
                decreed the plaintiff's suit even with reference to the
                lands in Kadduwal conceded to be non-ancestral and
                the land in Khasra No. 2408 measuring 4 bighas and
                16 biswas, which was not in the possession of the two
                sons Jodha Singh and Jai Singh. He was equally
                wrong in holding tHat the customary law which
                governed the parties did not permit the owner to will
                away ':my portion of the property, whether ancestral
                or self-acquired ; this is contrary to section 7 of Punjab
                Act II of 1920, which is in these terms :

                     "Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
                tained in section 5, Pqniab Laws Act, . 1872, no person
                shall contest any alienation of non-ancestral immova-
                ble property or any appointment of an heir to such
                property on the ground that such alienation or
                appointment is contrary to custom."
                     No other point arises in this appeal which fails and
                is dismissed with costs. in all the courts.
                                                        Appeal dismissed.
                     Agent for the appellant : Ganpat Rai.
                     Agent for the respondents : S. P. -Verma.

                        FATMA HAJI ALI MOHAMMAD HAJI
     1951
                                AND OTHERS
  Morell 2.
                                              "·
                             THE STATE OF BOMBAY.
                        [SAmo FAZL ALI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN,
                       MuKHERJEA and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.]
                     Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, s. 48-Rules under the
                Code, r. 92-Agricultural land used for other purposes-CoUectOf"•
                d•IY to alter assessment-Mere confirmation of Co/lecwr's tmltr
                rt'fusing to re-assess-Whether amounts to direction "' Ml
                otltnwist!-Rig/,t to re4Jsess•nt.
 ~C.R.         SUPREME COURT REPORTS
     llule 92 of the rulcis issued under the Bombay Land · Revenue        19!H
Code, 1879, provided that when land assessed for purposes of              -·-
agriculture only is subsequently used for any purpose unconnect-        Fa1ma H4it
ed with agriculture, the assessment upon the land so used shall       .lfli Moh-'
unless otherwise directed by the Government be altered under             and Others
s. 48 (2) by the Collector in accordance with rr. 81 to 87 : Held,           v.
that as the rule imposes an imperative duty on the Collector to       Th• 8141# of
alter the assessment, the power which has been given to the             Btm6izy.
governmeni to give directions to the Collector . not to act in
accordance with the imperative pr<.>visions of the rule has to be
exercised in clear and unambiguous terms as it affects civil rights
of the persons concerncc.i and the decision that the power has
been exercised must be notified in the usual manner.
     Where the Government .did not pass any resolution or issue
any directions to that effect but merely ccinfirmed on appeal an
order of the C<.>llector rejecting an application to assess non-
agricultural assessment on agricultural lands which had been used
for building purposes : Held, that the confirmation of the Col-
lector's order by the Government did not amount to a direction
te act otherwise within the mcaninJi: of r. 92 and the applicant
was entitled to have the assessment on the lands altered under
s. 48 (2) in accordance with fr. 81 to 87 as laid down in r. 92.
     CIVIL   APPELLATE JuR1so1cnoN        Appeal (Civil
 Appeal No. 28 of 1950) from a judgment and decree of
 the High Court of Judkature at Bombay dated.
 19th March, 1945, in Appeals Nos. 68 and 190 of 1942.
     H. D. Banaji (V. R. Desai, with him) for the
 appellants.
     M. C. Setalvad, Attorney-General for India (G. N.
 Joshi, with him) for the respondent.
      1951. February 5. The judgment o£ the Court was
 delivered by
      MAHAJAN J.-This is an appeal from a judJtment of                Mahaja~ j.
 the High Court of Judicature at Bombay modifying
 the decree of the trial court and decreeing partially
 the plaintiff's suit. The appellants are the legal
 representatives of the original plaintiff Haii Ali
 Mohamed Haji Cassum. The State of Bombay is the
 respondent.                                           ·
      The facts giving rise to this controversy, brieflv
 stated, are as follows :-
   35
               268         SUPREME COURT REPORTS.                [1951 J
   1951            Village Dahisar originally formed part of the Malad
FatmaHaj;      Estate comprising in all eight villages. The said estate
AliMoham•d    was conveyed by the East India Company to two
.tmd Othtrt
     v.        Dady brothers for valuable consideration by a deed of
Th1StaJ1 qf   indenture dated the 25th January, 1819. By that
  BornllaJ
              conveyance all the lands in the eight villages were
Mahoj.. J.    conveyed absolutely to the said purchasers and it was
              covenanted by the Company that the purchasers,
              their heirs and assigns shall peaceably and quietly
              enjoy the said villages and receive and take the rents
              and profits thereof without any hindrance or interrup-
              tion from the said Company. By a sale deed dated
              the 13th December, 1900, Haji Ca.ssum, father of the
              plaintiff, purchased the village of Dahisar from its
              proprietors for a price of Rs. 1,30,000 and after his
              death the plaintiff became the proprietor thereof and
              as such received rents and assessment from the ·tenants
              and holders of the lands in the village according to the
              rights prevailing ~der the . survey settlement which.
              had- taken place in the village about the year 1864-65.
                  In the year 1879 the . Bombay Land. Revenue Code
              was enacted. Section 48 of the Code is in these
              terms :-
                   "48. ( 1) The land revenue leviable on any land
              under the provisions of this Act shall be assessed, or
              shall be deemed to have been assessed, as the case may
              be, with reference to the ,use of the land-
                   ( a) .for the ,purpose of agriculture,
                   (b) for the purpose of building, and
                   ( c) for a purpose other th'an agriculture or build-
              ing.
                   (2) Where land assessed for use for any purpose is
              used for any other purpose, the assessment fix~d under
              the provisions of this Act upon such land shall, not-
              withstanding that the term for which such assessment
              may have been fixed has not expired, be liable to be
              altered and fixed at a different rate by such authority
              and subject to such rules as the Provincial Government
              may prescribe in this behalf .............. "
S;Ci:.R.    SUPREME COURT REPORTS                     269
    After the Act came .into force, the Government draft-         1951
ed rules under the provisions of section 214 for pro-          Fattna Hafi
mulgation. The inamdars represented to the Govern-             A.Ii Moluzmltl
                                                               air40tlin1
ment that the rules should be so framed as not to                   v.
prejudice their rights under the conveyances executed          .Tiu Stall qf .
                                                                ·Bombay,
by the Company in their favour. . The draft rules                r-
were promulgated · by a notification issued on the 5th         Mahqjanj.
June, 1907. On that date, the Government adopted
a resolution ordering that the rules be promulgated
and also giving an assurance to the inamdars to the
following effect :-
    "Government will, however, be prepared to amend
or abrogate these rules if they are found to be detri-
mental in any material respects to the interests of the
inamdars."
     Rule 92 is one of the rules promulgated under the
 provisions of the Act and it runs thus :-
      "When land assessed for purposes of agriculture
 only is subsequently used for any purpose unconnected
 with agriculture the · assessment upon the land so used
 shall, unless otherwise directed by Government, be
 altered under sub-section (2) of section 48 by the
 collector in accordance with rules 81 to 87 inclu,sive." ·
       On the 25th July, 1923, the plaintiff requested the
· Commissioner of Bombay, Suburban District, for a
  revision of the survey of Dahisar village. He execut-
  ed an agreement under the provisions of section 216
  of the Bombay Land Revenue Code and made a
  formal application in that behalf as required by the
  Code and the rules made thereunder. The Commissio-
   ner by his letter dated the 14th March, 1925, authorised
  the . extension of the provisions of chapters 8 · and 9 of
   the Land Revenue Code to the village in question.
   The plaintiff also deposited the necessary expenses
   required for the revision of the survey. The revision
   was made by. the Superintendent of the Land Records
   who submitted his report to the Commissioner on the
    15th December, 1926. This report was sanctioned by
   Government. The .order sanctioning the revised
   ~urvey was communicated to the plaintiff on the 23rd
                270          SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 {1~11

   1951
                December, 1927.        Under the revised survey the
/t...,.H'lfi    assessment of Rs. 4,217 on the village lands was in-
AliM•'-.•d      creased to Rs. 6,057-3-2, and the plaintiff from that
 au ()th~s
    V·,         date started recovering the increased assessment from
Tiu Stal• qf    the tenants of the lands in the village .
  -
 . BooU<y.
MaltajaoJ.           At the time of the revision of the survey it was
               found that nine plots of land comprised in eleven field
               numbers which were formerly agricultural had been
                built .upon and these were being used for non-agri-
               cultural purposes. The survey offi<:cr formed them
               into a separate group and ~howed them as kharaba
               and no assessment, either agricultural ot non-agri-
               cultural, was levied on these nine plots and the plaintiff
               could not therefore recover any assessment in respect
               of these plots after 1926. On the 30th Apri~ 1934, he
               requested the Collector to assess non-agricultural           ;.
               assessment on these plots. This request was refused
               by the Collector on the 17th July, 1935, in these
               terms :-
                                                     .
                   "With reference to your letter dated 30-4-1934, I
               have the honour to state that I regret your request
               ~annot be granted."                              ·
                     It has to be observed that this refusal was in con~
                µ-avention of the provisions of rule 92 which imposes
               on the Collector a duty to make alteration in the
                assessment, unless he has been directed to the contrary
               by Government. It was not denied that by the 17th
                July, 1935, no such direction had been given to the
                Collector by Government. If the Collector had done
               his duty as enjoined by rule 92, thjs lengthy and
               'Unnecessary litigation might well have been avoided.
                    Against the order <>f the Collector the plaintiff ap-
               pealed· to the Commissioner. In hJs appeal he pointed
               out that certain additional lands in the village had
               been converted to non-agricultural uses subsequent to
               the revision of the survey in 1926. The Commissioner
               declined to interfere. This iiiformation was conveyed
               by the Collector to the counsel for the plaintiff on the
               22nd May, 1937. Against tlie Commissioner's decision
               the plaintifi appealed to the Governor in Council and
     S.C.R.         SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 271
                                                                      1951
     on the 20th December, 1937, he received a copy of the
     follomng communication from Government to the                 FtitmaHtiji
                                                                   Ali Mohamed
     Commissioner :-                                                and Others
                                                                       v.
          "The undersigned presents compliments to the             The Sta"qf
     Commissioner, Northern Division, and with reference             Bombay.
     to his letter, No. L. N. D. 3124, dated 20th April;           Mahajan].
     1936, on the subject noted above, is directed to
     invite his attention, to the orders issued in Govern-
     ment Resolution, No. 5235/33, dated 8th· March,
     1937, and to state that Government confirm the
     action of the Collector, Bombay Suburban District,
     in refusing the Khot's request for the levy of non-
     agricultural assessment in the village of Dahisar.
                  By order of the Governor in Council,
      for Under Secretary to the Government of Bombay."
          In order to find out whether there was any resolu-
     tion of the Government as mentioned in the above
     communication, during the pendency of the suit the
     plaintiff issued the following      interrogatory to the
     Government of the State of Bombay :-
          "When was the decision, not to assess the lands
     mentioned in Schedule II of the plaint and other lands
      under rule 92, referred to in para. · 8 of their written
     statement arrived at by the Government ?
          Produce a copy of the said decision which may
     have been embodied in a Government resolution along
      with the opinion of the Government officers with
      which Government may have concurred."
           The answer given on behalf of the State Government
~.    to this question was as follows :-
           " (8) Government Memorandum, Revenue Depart-
      ment, No. 5235-B/33, dated the 8th March, 1937,
      confirmed the Collector's action in refusing the pro-
      prietor's request for the levy of non-agricultural assess-
      ment."
           This answer indicates that the Government acting
      under rule 92, neither adopted any resolution nor
      issued any notification giving any directions to the ·
      Collector contrary to the provisions contained · in that
     4-l! S. C. India/68
              272          SUPREME COURT REPORTS                   [1951)
   1951
              rule. All that it did was to confirm the Collectcx'~
Faz,,.aHaji   order rejecting the request of the plaintiff for making
Ali Mohamed
•nd 01/wrr    the assessment of non-agricultural lands in the village.
    v.
ThiS<ate ef        During the interval between 1927-37 a large number
  Bombay.      of plots of land mentioned in schedule II were put to
Afa/laja•J.   non-agricultural uses by the tenants in possession of
               them and a . number of buildings were constructed
              thereupon. The plaintiff having failed in persuading
              the Government to make an assessment under rule 92
               of such lands, after service of notice under section 80 ·of
              the Code of Civil Procedure, instituted the present suit,
              (a) for a declaration that he was entitled to have non-
              agricultural assessment made on all lands in the village
              of Dahisar which were used or which may thereafter
              be brought into use for purposes other than agricultural
              and (b) for an order that the Collector of Bombay,
              Suburban District be directed to determine the amount
              of non-agricultural assessment on the lands mentioned
              in schedules I and II of the plaint and to levy the
              same under clause 2 of rule 96 and pay it to the
              plaintiff, or in the alternative, to dire.ct the defendant
              to issue a commission to the plaintiff under section 88
              of the Land Revenue Code. Schedule I gave details
              of the nine plots of land that had been converted into
              non-agricultural use before the survey of 1926, while
              schedule II gave details of those lands which since
              1926 up to the date of the suit had been converted to
              such use. The plaintiff also claimed damages to the
              extent of Rs. 120 as compensation fo,r loss ·of agri-
              cultural assessment for six years in respect of lands
              mentioned in schedule I and he claimed similar dama,.
              ges to the extent of Rs. 300 for loss of non-agricultu-
              ral assessment in respect of the other lands. He also
              claimed future damages and costs.
                  The suit was resisted by the State Government .on a
              number of grounds. It was contended that it was
              barred under section 4 ( c) of the Revenue Jurisdiction
              Act and under article 14 of the Indian Limitation Act.
              On the merits it was pleaded that the action of the
              wrvey officer and the Collector in refusing to levy
              non-agricultural :issessment on lands contained in the
 S.c.R.      SUPREME COURT REPORTS                      273
 two schedules was lawful and proper and t;hat the dvil           1951
 court could not question the discretion of the Govern-        Fattna Haft
 ment in such matters.                                         .Ali Mohamtd
                                                               a11d Othtr3
                                                                   v.
      The trial Judge negatived all the technical objections   The Statt ef
 raised by the defendant and on the merits held that             Bomba,;.
 the Collector's action in refusing to levy non-               MahajanJ.
agricultural assessment on the lands in question was
wrongful. He, therefore, granted the declaration pray-
ed for. He, however, refused to give further relief · to
the plaintiff and disallowed the prayer for a . direction
for levying non-agricultural assessment on the lands
given in the two schedules and for paying it to the pla-
intllf. He observed that the Government would be well
advised if it levied such assessment and paid it to the
plaintiff.
      Two appeals were taken to the High Court against
  the decree of the trial Judge. That Court modified this
  decree and granted a declaration to the plaintiff
 that he was entitled to receive non-agricultural asses~
 ment on all lands which are and which may hereafter
 be used for non-agricultural purposes.       It ordered
 the defendant to levy such altered assessment on the
 lal}ds mentioned in schedule I and decreed consequen-
 tial damages to the plaintiff in respect to these lands.
 As regards the lands in schedule II, the plaintiff's suit
for a direction to assess and levy non-agricultural
assessment on them was dismissed. The court drew
a distinction between lands that had been converted
to non-agricultural use before the survey of 1926 and
thos~ which had since then been converted to such use.
As regards the former, it was held that the survey
officer had erroneously declined to make non-agricul-
tural assessment on those lands and his action was
ultra vires. Relief was given to the plaintiff regarding
those lands as prayed for. As regards the latter it
was held that it was within the discretion of the
Government to order an alteration of the assessment
on such lands and this discretion could not be ques-
tioned in a court of law. The plaintiff being dissatis.-
fied with this part of the decision made ~ application
for leave. to appeal to the Privy Council on the 15th
                274         SUPREME COURT REPORTS                   [1951]
   1951
                September, 1945. During the pendency ot the applica-
P'atma H~ji     tion the plaintiff died and his heirs and executors were
AliM1Mmed
cm/ Others      impleaded as his legal representatives. A certificate
    v.          for leave to appeal to the Privy Council was granted
The State -.f
  Btnnba)•.     on the 10th February; 1947, and the appeal preferred
                under the certificate is now before us for decision.
Mahajan].
                     There is no conrtoversy in this appeal as regards the
                reliefs that have been given to the plaintiff by the
                High Court. The appeal concerns the further relief
                refused to the plaintiff in respect to the lands mention-
                ed in schedule II. It was contended on behalf of the
                appellant that under the terms of the conveyance dated
                25th January, 1819, and of the covenants contained
                therein it was not open to the Government or the
                Collector to refuse the alteration of the assessment
                claimed by the plaintiff and that the Government · could
                not give any direction under rule 92 which would be
                contrary to these covenants and assurances. It was said
                that the Government was bound to use its power to levy
                assessment as trustee for the transferee and that the
                exercise of this power could not be arbitrarily refused
                by it. It was urged that the Government Resolution
                dated 5th June, 1907, clearly indicated that the rules
                framed under the Land Revenue Code were not intend-
                ed to affect adversely the owners of alienated lands and
                the Collector was bound to make an assessment as re-
                quired by the plaintiff. Lastly, it was argued that as a
                matter of fact Government never exercised its power
                under rule 92 and never .gave a direction to the Collector
                to a contrary effect and that the mere affirmatfon of the
                erroneous order of the Collector by Government did not
                amount to a direction contemplated by the provisiom
                of rule 92.
                     Having considered this case in all its aspects, we
                have reached the decision that the High Court's deci-
                sion in so far as it refused relief to the plaintiff in res-
                pect to the lands mentioned in schedule II should be
                reversed. Rule 92 cited in the earlier part of this
                judgment in imperative terms directs the Collector to
                alter the assessment in case agricultural lands are
                 converted to non-agricultural use. The Collector. hat
              s.c:R.      SUPREME COURT REPORTS                       275
-   ...       no ·option in the matter and as soon as an application is         1951
              made to him he should proceed to make an assessment            Falma Haji
              and levy it on the non-agricultural lands. When the            Ali Mohamtti
                                                                              anti Othtrs
              Collector declined to accede to the request of the plaint-           v.
              iff he acted in contravention of the clear provisions          The State qf
                                                                               Bombay.
              of the rule, because admittedly at that time no "direc-
              tions to the contrary" had been given to hlni by the           ltfahajan j.
              Government. There was no resolution of the Govern-
              ment in existence and no notification had been issued
              under the provisions of rule 92 directing the Collector
              not to make an alteration in the assessment when
              requhed to do so. Th.e Commissioner, in dismissing
              the plaiD.tiff's appeal, also contravened the provisions
              of rule 92. When the matter went up in appeal to the
              Governor in Council, no decision was taken under the
               provisions of rule 92. The High Court assumed that
               the confirmation of the action of the Collector by the
              Government amounted to a direction by the Govern-
               ment to the contrary in respect of the lands in
              question.
                    We are unable to agree with this conclusion. When
              Government has been given the power to give direc-
              tions to the _Collector not to act in accordance with the
              imperative provisions of a rule which enjoin upon him
               to make the altered assessment, that power has to be
              exercised in clear and unambiguous terms as it affects
               civil rights of the persons concerned and the decisions
              that the power has been exercised should be notified in
              the usual manner in which such decisions are made
               known to the public. It was conceded by Mr. Joshi that
               no such -decision was taken by Government and no
               direction was issued by Government under rule 92.
          .    Dismissal by the Government of the plaintiff's appeal
               and affirmation by it of an erroneous order of the Col-
               lector could not be held to amount to action under the
               provisions of rule 92. _ In these circumstances, the
               plaintiff was clearly entitled to further relief in respect
               to lands mentioned in schedule II and a direction
               should have been issued to the State Govrenmcnt for
               making altered assessment on non-agricultural land.
               and levy it on them and pay 'it to the plaintiff.
                36
               Zl6           SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 (1951]
   1951
                    Mr. Joshi contended that the true effect of the pr<>-
Jfatma Haji    visions contained in section 48 (2) an:d rule 92 was that
Ali MohtJmtd
 nd Others.    the Government was not bound to levy altered assess-
     v.        ment on lands converted to non-agricultural use, that
The State ef
   Bombay.     the section merely provided that the persons in posses-
               sion of land were liable for such assessment but it did
Mahajan].      not say that it was obligatory on the Government to
               make it and that the court had no jurisdiction to inter-
               fere with the discretion of the Government in the
               matter. We think that when a liability is imposed by
               a statute, that liability cannot be defeated by the
               exercise of any discretion by Gov~rnment or by making
               rules wh'ich may negative that liability, but it is not
               necessary in this case to finally decide the point as the
               appeal stands decided otherwise. It is also unnecessary
               to express an opinion as to the precise scope of the
               power conferred on Government by the language of
               rule 92.
                    The plaintiff's learned counsel very properly did not
               press his appeal in respect to the claim of damages
               concerning lands mentioned in schedule II. Plaintiff's
               suit to that extent fails.
                    For the reasons given above the appeal is allowed
               and the plaintiff's suit is decreed with costs except in
               regard to· the claim for damages in respect to the lands
               mentioned "in schedule II. The defendant is directed to
               make an assessment on lands mentioned in schedule II
               in the same way as in respect of the lands mention-
               ed in schedule I and levy the same and pay it to the
               plaintiff.
                                                       Appeal allowed.
                     Agent for the appellants : K. ]. Kale.
                     Agent for the respondent : P. A. Mehla.


                                                      /
