                                                                                        9 63


            RAM RATTAN (DEAD) BY LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
                                                  v.
                                  BAJRANG LAL & ORS.
                                           May 5, 1978
         [Y. V. CHANDRACHUD, CJ., D. A. DESAI AND R. S. PATHAK, JJ.J

           Duty of Court to consider preliniinary objection as to ad111issibi/i1y of a
        docurnent in ei·idence-Explained.


-•         Stan1p Act, Sections 33, 35, 36-Scope of.

            Hl!reditary office of Shebait enjoyed by a person, whether 1novable or
        immovable property-Whether the deed of Rift of such a right requires regis-
                                                                                                  c·
        tration.-Tlie office being iln1norable property in the instant case, the gift deed' i.y
         inadmissible in ci·idence for want of registration.
             The plaintiff-appellant, \vho died pending the appeal sought a declaratioa
        that he was entitled -to a right of v.:orship by turn (called Osra) for 10 days
        in a circuit of 18 months in the temple of Kalyanji Maharaj at village Diggi
        District. Tonk, R_ajasthan u•1der the Will Ext. dated 22 ·September, 1961 cxe·            Di
        cuted by deceased Mst. Acharaj, ·wife of Onk,ar. The Trial Court did not try
        the preliminary objection. when it was raised at the time of the trial; but
         ma.de a note : "Objected. A!lowed subj'ect to objection". The Cou:t rejec::ed
        it at 'the time of arguments taking recourse to Section 36 of the Stamp Act.
        On the question of registration it held that as the "turn of worship W<J-s a
        movable property", if did not require compulsory registration and decreed the
        suit. In appecll the first Appellate Court reversed the Judgment, inter aria.
        hol_~ing that the document Ext I wa5 a gift and as it involved ~ift of immo-
         vable property the document was inadmissible in evid~nce both on the ground              E·.
        that it is not duly stamped and for want of registration. The Plaintiff's second
        ~1p_peal before the High Court failed.

           Qismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court


-            l-lELO_ : 1. \Vhen a document is tendered in evid.ence by the plaintiff while
         in witness box and the defendant raises an objection that the document is in-
        admissible in evidence as it Vias not duly stamped and for want of Registra-
        t_iQn, it is obligatory upon the Trial Judge to apply his mind to the objection
                                                                                                  F
        raised and to decide the objection according to law. TenJency sometimes is
        lo postpone the decison to avoid interruption in the process of recording
         evidence and. therefore. a very convenient device is restored to, of marking
    /    th~ dpc_ument in evid.ence 'subject to objection.'     This. however, would not
        mean that the objection that the instrument is not duly stamped ·is jUCHcially
        decided; it is merely postponed. In such a situation at a later stage before
        the suit is finitlly dispQsed of it would non-the·less be obligntory upon the             G
         Court to decide the objection, If; after applying its mind to the rival contentro,ns
        the tri~l court admits a document in eviden):;e, s. 36- of tQ.6 St<:1.µtp Act wou)d,
        come. into play and such admission cannot be called in question at any stage
        of the sarne &ui~ or pro~eeding on the ground t'ba,t the instrument h&S not
         been duly stamped. The Court, and of hecessity it would be trial court
        before which the objection is taken about admissibility of document on the
        ground that it is not duly stamped, as to judicially determine the matter as
        soor;i .as .the document is ~ende.:re4 in evidence anµ before it is marked as an
         e~h1b1t 10 the case an~ w~ere ~ docun1ent has been inadvertently . admitted              H
        ~1thout the court applying its mind as to the question of admissibility, the
        1n6tr-Um.e-Jl,t could1 not be saidr to have been admitted in evidence With a view
         to attracting s. 36. [966 C·G]
                         SUPREME COURT REPORTS                     [1978] 3 S.C.R.

A        In the instant case, the endoI'Sement made by the 1earned trial judge that
    "objected, allowed subject to objection", clearly indicates that when the objec~
    tion was raised it was not judicially determined and the document was merely
     tent<itively marked and in such a si'uation s. 36 would not be Jttracted. lY66
     G-H]

       Javar Chand v. Pukhraj Surana; A.LR. 1961 S.C. 1655.

         2. Undoubtedly, if .a person having by law a'uthority to receive evidence
     and the civil court is one such person before whom any instrument chargeable
    with duty is produced and it is found that such instrument is not duly stamped,
    the same has to be impounded. The duty and penalty has to be recovered
    according to law. Section 35, however, prohibits its admission in evidence
    till such duty and penalty is paid. The plaintiff has neither paid the duty
    nor the penalty till today. Therefore, .wricto sensu the instrument is not
     ad1nissible i•,1. evidence. [967 A·B]
         3. The hereditary office of Shebait which would be enjoyed by the person
                                                                                       -f
    by turn would be immovable property. The gift of such immovable property
    must, of course, be by registered instrument. Exhibit I being not registered
                                                                                            •
    the High Court was justified in excluding it from evidence.     The definition
    of immovable property in S. 2(6) of the -Registration Act lends assurance to
    treating Shehait's hereditary office as immovable property because the defini·
    tion includes hereditary allowances. Office of Shebait is hereditary unless
    provision to the contrary is made in the deed creating the endowment. In
    the conception of Shebait both the elements of office and property duties and
D   personal interest are mixed up and blended together and one of the elements
    cannot be detached from the other. Old texts, one of the principal sources
    of Hindu Jaw a.nd the commentaries thereon, and over a century the courts
    with very few exceptions have recognised hereditary office of Shebait as im·
     immovable property, and it ha<; all along been treated as immovable property
     a.hnost uniformly. [970 A·C]
        Angurbala Mullick v. Debabrata Mullick, [1951] SCR 1125 and Cornmis·
    sioner of Hindu Religious Endowments Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha
    Sit•arn;ar of Sri Shirur Mutt, [1954] S.C.R. 1005; foilowed.

         Krishnabhat Bin Hiragange v. Kanbluu Bin Mahalbhat 6 Bombay High
    Court Reports 137, Balvantrey alias Tatiaji Banaji v. Purshouun SidhP.~liwar
    and Anr., 9 Bombay High Court Reports. 99, Raiji Manor v. DeJai Kallianrai



p
    lluk1natrai, 6 Bombay High Court Reports 56 Mahara11a Fallehsan[:ji Jaswanr·
    sanRii v. Desai Kallianraiji Hekoomutraiji, 1 I.A. 34, Ra{?hoo Pandey & A nr.
    v. Kassl' Parey and Ors. I.L.R. 10 Cal. 73, Manohar Mukherjee v. Bhunendra
     i'Vath Mukherjee and Ors .. A.l.R. 1932 Cal. 791; approved.

       Eshan Chandt'T Roy & Ors. v. Mann1ollini Dassi. I.L.R. 4 Cal. 693, Jharu!u
                                                                                                -
    Das v. Jalandhar Thakur, I.L.R. 39 Cal. 887, la[!den Sinf.[h v. Rcun Saran
    Pande and Ors. A.I.R. 1927 Patna 7; explained.

        Crv:rL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 1244 of 1973.
        Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Order/Decree                          '
    dated the 14th August, 1972 of the Rajasthan High Court in S.B. Civil
    Second Appeal No. ?20 of 1968.
        V. S. Desai, Sharad Manohar, S. S. Khanduia and R. K. Shukla for
    the Appellant.

        Badri Das Sharma for Respondents Nos. 1, 3 and 4.

       M. B. L. Bhargava, S. N. Bhargava and Sobhagmal Jain for Res-
    pondent No. 2.
                        RAM RATTAN V. BA.TRANG LAL (Desai, /.)                     ~ 65



                The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
                 DESAI, J.-The unsuccessful plaintiff, appellant in this appeal by
            special leave, who died pending the appeal, seeks a declaration that h6
            is entitled to a right of worship by turn (called Osra) for 10 days in
            a circuit of 18 months in the temple of Kalyanji Maharaj at Village
            Diggi, Distt. Tonk, Rajasthao, under the will Ext. I dated 22nd Septem-
            ber 1961 executed by deceased Mst. Acharaj, wife of Onkar.               The    B
            suit was resisted by four amongst five defendants, the 5th defendant
            having not put in an appearance. Various contentions were raiscc.
             but the only one surviving for present consideration is whether docu-
        •   ment Exht. I purporting to be a will of deceased Mst. Acharaj is a


-
             will or a gift, and if the latter. whether it is admissible in evide!!.£e on
             the ground that it was not duly stamped and registered as required
             by law?                                                                        c
                When the plaintiff referred to the disputed document in his evidence
            and proceeded to prove the same, an objection was raised on behalf
    •       of the ddendents that the document was inadmissible in evidence as
    }
            being not duly stamped and for want of registration. The trial court
            did not decide the objection when raised but made a note : "Objected ..
            Allowed subject to objection", and proceeded to mark the document
            as Exhibit. 1. When at the stage of arguments, the defendants con-
            tended that the document Ext. I is inadmissible in evidence, the·
            learned trial judge rejected the contention taking recourse to section
            36 of the Stamp Act. On the question of registration it was held that
            the document is not compulsorily registrable insofar as the subject-
            matter of the suit is concerned, viz., turn of worship which in the
    --      opinion of the learned trial judge movable property. On appeal 'by the
            defendants the judgment of the trial judge was reversed, inter alia,
            holding that the document Exht. I was a gift and as it involved gift of
                                                                                            E


            immovable property, the document was inadmissible in evidence both
            on the ground that it is not duly stamped and for want of registration.
•           The plaintiff's second appeal to the High Court did not meet with
             success.

                  The only question canvassed before this Court is that even if upon
             its true construction the document Ext. I purports to be a gift of turn
             of worship as a Shebait-cum-Pujari in a Hindu temple, does it purport
             to transfer an interest in immovable property, and, therefore, the
    ,        document is compulsorily registrable ? On the question whether the
              document was duly stamped it was said with some justification that it
             was not open to the Court to exclude the document from being read              G
              in evidence on the ground that it was not duly stamped because in
              any event under s. 33 of the Stamp Act it is obligatory upon the court
              to impound the document and recover duty and penalty as provided
              in proviso (a) to s. 35.

                  Mst. Acharaj, wife of Onkar had inherited the right to worship hv
             turn for 10 days in a circuit of 18 months in Kalyanji Maharaj Temple.         ff
             It is common ground that she was entitled during her turn to officiate
             as Pujari and received all the offering made to the deity. During the
                                                                 [Jl)78j 3 S.C.R.

       period of her turn she wttu!e be holding the office of a ·shebait. She
       purported to transfer this office with .its ancillary rights to plarntiff
       Ram )'lattan under the deed Exhibit I purporting to be a will. Upon
       its ttue construction it has been held to be a deed of gift and ·that
      finding was not controverted, nor was it possible to controvert it, in
      view of the recital in the deed that : "now Ram Rattan will acquire
      legal rights and possession of my entire property from the date the
      will is written the details of the property are in Schedule 'A' and after
      him, his legal heirs will acquire those rights" It appears crystal clear
      that the document purports to pass the title to the property thereby
     conveyed in presenti and in the face of this recital it could never be
     said that the document Ext. I purports to be a Will.                           •
           If by document Ext. I the donor conveyed property by gift to donec
     and the property included the right to worship by turn in a temple, is
     it transfer of immovable' property which could only be done by a
     registered instrument which must be duly stamped according to the
                                                                                    '
                                                                                        -
     provisions of the relevant Stamp Act ?
        When the document was tendered in evidence by the plaintiff while
    in witness box, objection having been raised by the defendants that
    the d.ocument was inadmissible in evidence as it was not duly stamped
D and for want of registration, it was obligatory upon the )earned tr; a 1
    judge to apply his mind to the objection raised and decide the objection
    in accordance with law. Tendency sometimes is to postpone the deci-
    sion to avoid interruption in the process of recording evidence and,
    therefore, a very convenient device is resorted to, of marking the
   document in evidence subject to objection. This, however; would not
   mean that the objection as to admissibility on the ground that the
   instrument is not duly stamped is judicially decided; it is merely post-
   poned. In such a situation at a later stage before the sultTs finally
   disposed of it wonld none-the-less be obligatory upon the conn to
   decide the objection. If after applying mind to the rival contentions
   the trial conrt admits a document in evidence, s. 36 of the Stamp Act
   would come into play and such admission cannot be called in question
   at any stage of the same suit or proceeding on the ground that the
  instrument has not been duly slan'lped. The Court, and of necessity
  it would be trial Court before which the objection is taken about admis-
  sibility of document on the ground that it is not duly stamped, has to
  judicially determine the matter as soon as the document is tendered
  in evidence and before it is marked as an exhibit in the case -and where
  a document has been inadvertently ad1lll'tted without the Court applying
  its mind as to the question of admissibility, the instrument could not
  be said to have been admitted in evidence with a view to attractiw
  s. 36 (see Javar Chand v. Pukhraj Surana).(1) The endorsement
  made by the learned trial judge that "objected, allowed subject to
  objection", clearly indicates that when the objection was raised it was
  not judidally determined and the document was merely tentatively
  marked and in such a situation s. 36 would not be attracted.
      Mr. Desai then contended that where an instrument not duly stamp-
   ed or insufficiently stamped is tendered in evidence, the Court has to
    rJ)   A1R 1961 S.C, 1665.
                   RAM RATTAN V. BAHANG LAL (Desai, J.)                     967

        impound it as obligated by s. 33 and then proceed as required by s.           A
        35, viz., to recover the deficit stamp duty along with penalty. Un-
        dou'b!e'dly, if a person having by law authority to receive evidence and
        the civil court is one such person before whom any instrument charge-
        able with duty is produced and it is found that such instrument is not
        duly stamped, the same has to be impounded. The duty and penalty
        l'l\Js to be recovered according to law. Section. 35, however, prnhibits
        its admission in evidence till such duty and penalty is paid. The plain-      B
        tiff has. neither paid the duty nor penalty till today. Therefore, stricto
        sensu the instrument is not admissible in evidence. Mr. Desai, how-
    '   ever, wanted us to refer the instrument to the authority competent to
        adjudicate the requisite stamp duty payable on the instrument and then
        recowr the duty and penalty which the party who tenders the instru-
         ment in evidence is in any event bound to pay and, therefore, on this
         account it was said that the document should not be excluded from            c
         evidence. The duty and the penalty has to be paid when the document
         is tendered in evidence and an objection is raised. The difficnlty in
         this case arises from the fact that the learned trial judge declined to
    "    decide the objection on merits arid then sought refuge under s. 36. The
         plaintiff was, therefore, unable to pay the deficit duty and penalty which
         when paid subject to all just exceptions, the document has to be admit-
         ted in evidence.      In this background while holding that the docu-
         ment Ext. I would be inadmissible in evidence as it is not duly stamped,
         we would not decline to take it into consideration because the trial
         Court is bound to impound the document and deal with it according
         to law.

            Serious controvetsy centered, however, round the qnestion whether         E
        right to worship by turn 'is immovable property gift of which can only
        be made by re.gistered instrument. Hindi: law recogniS(0,~0        !E!tof
        property to an idol. In respect of possession and management of
        the property which belongs to the Devasthanam or temple the res-

-       ponsibility would be in the manager who is described by Hindu law
        as Shebait. The devolution of the office of Shebait depends on the
         terms of the deed or will by which it is created and in the absence
         of a provision to the contrary, the settler himself becomes a Shellait
                                                                                      F
         and the office devolves according to line of inheritence from the
        founder and passes to his heirs. This led to an arrangement amongst
         various heirs equally entitled to inherit the office for the due execu-
         tion Of the functions belonging to the office, discharging duty in
    •    turn. This turn of worship is styled as 'Pala' in West Bengal and
         'Osra' in Rajasthan. Shebaiti being held' to be property, in Angur-          G
         bdla Mulick v. Debabrata Mullick,(') this Court recognised the
         right of a family to succeed to the religions office of Shebaitship.
          This hereditary office of Shebait is traceable to old Hindn texts and
          is a recognised concept of traditional Hindn law. It appears to be
         heritable and partible in the strick sense that it is enjoyed by heirs of
          equal degree by turn and transferable by gift subject to the limita-
          tion that it may not pass to a non-Hindu. On principles of morality         H
         and propriety sale of the office of Shebait is not favoured.
              I) [1951] SCR 1125.
      968               SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 [ J978] 3 S.C.R.

A        The position of Shebait is not merely that of a Pujari. He is a
     human ministrant of the deity. By virtue of the office a Shebait is
     an administrator of the pro!l_erty attached to the temple of which he
     is Shebait. Both the eleme_nts of office and property, of duties and
     personal interest are blended together in the conception of Shebaitship
     and neither can be detached from the other (vide Commissioner of
     Hindu Religions Endorsements, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha
B    Swamiar of Sri Shlrur Mutt). ( 1 )

         The question then is whether the hereditary office of Shebait is            ,
    immovable property. Much before the enactment of the Transfer
    of Property Act a question arose in the context of the Limitation Act
    then in force whether a suit for a share in the worship and the emolu-
    ments incidental to the same would be suit for recovery of immovable
                                                                                 t       -
c   property or an interest in immovable property. In Krishnabhat bin                •
    Hiragang~ v. Konabhat bin Mahalbhat et al,(') after referring to
    various texts of Hindu law andl the commentaries of English com-
    mentators thereon, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court
    \ield as under :
              "Although, therefore. the office of a priest in a· temple,
•         when it is not annexed to the ownership of any land, or
          held by virtne of such ownership, may not, in the ordinary
          sense of the term, be immovable property, but is an in-
        . corporeal hereditament of a personal nature, yet being by
         the custom of Hindus classed with immovable property,
          and so regarded in their law ...... "
E        The privileges and precedence attached to a hereditary office were
     termed in Hindu law as Nibandha and the text of Yajnavalkay treated
     Nibandha, loosely translated as corody, as immovable property.


                                                                                         -
     Soon thereafter the question again arose in Balyantray alias Tatiaii
    Bapaii v. Purshotam Sidheshvar and another('), where, in view of a
    conflict in decision between Krishnabhat (supra) and Baiji Manor v.
    Desai Kallianrai Hukmatrai('), the matter was referred to a Full
F   Bench of 5 Judges. The question arose in the context of the Limita-
    tion Act in a suit to recover fees payable to the incumbent of a here-
    ditary office, viz., that of a village Joshi (astrologer). The conten-
    tion was that such a hereditary office of village Joshi is immovable
    property. After exhaustively referring to the texts of Yajnavalkay
    and the commentaries thereon, Westropp, C.J. observed that the word
    'corody' is not a happy translation of term Nibandha. It was held
G   that Hindu law has always treated hereditary office as immovable
    property. These two decisions were affirmed by the Judcial Com-
    mittee of the Privy Council in Maharana Fattehsangii Jaswantsangji v.
    Desai Kallianraiji Hekoomutraiji( 5 ). The principle that emerges
       (1) [1954] SCR 1005.
       (2) 6 Bombay High Court Reports 137.
H      (3) 9 Bombay High Court Reports 89.
       ( 4) e Bombay High Court Reports 55.
       (') 1 I.A. 34.
                           RAM RATTAN v. BAJRANG LAL        (Desai, l.)           969


            from these decisions is that when the question concerns the rights of         A
            Hindus it must be taken to include whatever the Hindu law classes as
            immovable although not so, in ordinary acceptation of the word and
            to the application of this rule within the appropriate limits the Judicial
            Committee sees no object.ion. In Raghav Pandey & Anr. v. Kasav
            Parey & Ors. (1), the Calcutta High Court held that the right to offi-
            ciate as a, priest at funeral ceremonies of Hindus is in the nature of
            immovable property. A Full Bench of the Calcutta High Court in                B
            Manohar Mukherjee v. Bhupendra Nath Mukherjee & Others('),
            held that the office of Shebait is hereditary and is regarded in Hindu
            Law as immovable property. This Court took note of these deci-
            sions with approval in Angurbala Mullick's case (supra).

                  Mr. Desai urged that there is a distinct line of authorities which
             indicate that a Pala or turn of worship is movable property. In
                                                                                          c
             Mulla's Transfer of Property Act, 5th Edition, p. 17, the author has
             observed that a pala or turn of worship is movable property. In
             Eshan Chandra Roy & Ors. v. Monobini Desai(') it was said that it
    ,...     was not possible to come to the conclusion that the right to worship
             an idol is in the nature of an interest in immovable property. It is
             a bare statement with no reference to texts of Hindu law or commen- D
             taries thereon. In Jharnla Das v. Jalandhar Thakur(4), it was held
             that the office of Shcbait is hereditary and that the suit which was
             brought after a period of 12 years was barred by limitation. This
             decision does not specify the nature of property termed as turn of
             worship in Hindu law. The Patna High Court in .Tagdeo v. Ram
              Saran Pande & Ors.("), has in terms held that a turn of worship is
             not interest in immovable property and, therefore: a sale thereof E
             does not require registration. The decision purports to follow the
             ratio in Eshan Chander Roy's case (supra) which gives no reasons for
             the decision and also Jharula Das's case (supra) where this que1ltion
             appears not to have been in terms raised.

-                 The definiti<;m of immovable property in s. 3 of the Transfer of
              Property Act is couched in negative form in that it does not include
              standing timber, growing crops, or grass. The statute avoids positi-        F
              vely defining what is immovable property but merely excludes certain
          r - types of property from being treated as immovable property. Section
        ,,.-. 2( 6) of the Registration Act defines immovable property to include
      ;
              lands, buildings, hereditary allowances, rights to ways, lights, ferries,
              fisheries or any other benefit to arise out of land, and things attached
     •        to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to
              the earth, but not standing timber, growing crops or grass. Section         G
              2(26) of the General Clauses Act defines immovable property to
              include land, benefits to arise out of land and things attached to the
              earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth.
                 (!) !LR IO Cal. 73.
                 (2) AIR 1932 Cal. 791.
                 (3) !LR 4 Cal. 683,                                                      H
                 (4) !LR 39 Cal. 887.'
                 (S) AIR 1927 Patna 7.
              11-329S:Cl/78
      970              SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 [1978] 3 S.C.R.

A It may be mentioned that the definition of immovable property in
   Registration Act lends assurance to treating Shebait's hereditary office
   as immovable property because the definition includes hereditary
   allowaces. Office of Shebait is hereditary unless provision to tke
   countrary is made in the deed creating the endowment. In the con-
   ception of Shebait both the elements of office and property,
   duties and personal interest are mixed up and blended together and
B one of the elements cannot be detached from the other. Old texts,
  one of the principal sources of Hindu law and the commentaries there-
   on, and over a century the Courts with very few exceptions have
  recognised hereditary office of Shebait as immovable property, and
  it has all along been treated as immovable property a!most uniformly.
  While. examining the nature and character of an office as envisaged
  by Hindu law it would be correct to accept and designate it in
  the same manner as has been done by the Hindu Jaw text writers
                                                                               t
  and accepted by courts over a Jong period. It is, therefore, safe to             •
  conclude that the hereditary office of Shebait which would be enjoyed
  by the person by turn would be immovable property. The gift of
  such immovable property must of course be by registered instrument.
  Exhibit I being not registered, the High Court was justified in exclud-
B ing it from evidence. On this conclusion the plaintiff's suit has been
  rightly dismissed.
       This appeal accordingly fails and is dismissed with costs.


    S.R.                                                Appeal dismissed.




                                                                                       a




                                                                                       b

                                                                                       Ii
                                                                                       "'i-
