916                      [2023]REPORTS
               SUPREME COURT    4 S.C.R. 916                   [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A                            YAMAL MANOJBHAI
                                        v.
                          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
                       (Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 55 of 2023)
B                                 MAY 04, 2023
             [KRISHNA MURARI AND SANJAY KAROL, JJ.]
             Customs Act, 1962 – ss.123, 127B – Seized goods specified
      u/s.123, remedy of settlement u/s.127B if available – Held: Per Krishna
      Murari, J. In cases of seizure within the customs area, s.123 cannot
C     apply and the accused is entitled to the remedy of settlement –
      Decision passed by the Bombay High Court in Suresh Raheja case
      states the correct position of law – Per Sanjay Karol, J. Proviso to
      s.127B(1) specifies certain categories of goods that are barred from
      the jurisdiction of the settlement commission including goods
      mentioned u/s.123 and goods relating to NDPS Act – Thus, s.127B
D     would not apply for settlement in respect of the goods enumerated
      u/s.123 – In view of divergence of opinion, matter to be placed
      before the Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders –
      Constitution of India – Article 21.
             Union of India vs Suresh Raheja & Ors. 2011 (267)
             E.L.T. 487 (Bom.) – approved.
E
             Lilavati Bai v. State Of Mysore AIR 1957 SC 521 :
             [1957] SCR 721 – referred to.
             Additional Commissioner of Customs v. Ram Niwas Verma
             2015 SCC Online Del 11542; Commissioner of Customs
             v. Avinash Dawar & Anr. 2015 SCC Online Del 13875;
F            Commissioner of Customs v. Jyotsana Chikersal & Anr.
             2019 SCC Online Del 6574; Additional Commission of
             Customs vs. Ashok Kumar 2016 (336) E.L.T 224 (Del);
             Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd vs. Union Of India
             2006 (201) ELT 529 (Bom) – referred to.
             Commissioner of Customs v. M. Ambalal (2011) 2 SCC
G
             74 : [2010] 15 SCR 937; Northern Corporation v. Union
             of India (1990) 4 SCC 239 : [1990] 3 SCR 621; Dalip
             Singh v. State of U.P. and Ors. (2010) 2 SCC 114 :
             [2009] 16 SCR 111 – referred to.
             Union of India v. Suresh Raheja 2011 (267) E.L.T. 487
H            (Bom.); Additional Commissioner of Customs v. Ram
                                       916
        YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                         917


       Niwas Verma 2015 SCC Online Del 11542;                                            A
       Commissioner of Customs v. Avinash Dawar and Anr.
       2015 SCC Online Del 13875; Commissioner of Customs
       v. Jyotsna Chikersal and Anr. 2019 SCC Online Del
       6574; Commissioner of Customs v. Ashok Kumar Jain
       2013 (292) ELT 32 (Del.) – referred to.
                         Case Law Reference                                              B
In the judgment of KRISHNA MURARI, J.
[1957] SCR 721                        referred to                Para 40
In the judgment of SANJAY KAROL, J.
[2010] 15 SCR 937                     referred to                Para 3
                                                                                         C
[1990] 3 SCR 621                      referred to                Para 30
[2009] 16 SCR 111                     referred to                Para 31
       CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petition
(Criminal) No.55 of 2023.
       (Under Article 32 of The Constitution of India)                                   D
       V. S. Nankani, Sr. Adv., Ashish Batra, Advs. for the Petitioner.
       K. M. Nataraj, N. Venkatraman, ASGs, Vatsal Joshi, Raghav
Sharma, Rajat Sharma, A. K. Sharma, Mukesh Kumar Maroria, V. C.
Bharathi, Rupesh Kumar, H. R. Rao, A. K. Kaul, Ranjit Kant, Ms.
Aakansha Kaul, Advs. for the Respondents.
                                                                                         E
       The Judgments* of the Court were delivered by
       KRISHNA MURARI, J.
       1. The present writ petition filed under Article 32 of the Constitution
of India raises an issue of huge importance of personal liberty under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India, regarding the right of an accused
under the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Customs                     F
Act’) to settle the dispute as per provisions contained under chapter
XIV A of the Customs Act.
       2. The writ petitioner, who is a Non-Resident Indian (for short,
‘NRI’), was arrested on 04.10.2022 at the Delhi International Airport. It
is the case of the respondent that petitioner had tried to smuggle high                  G
value goods, mainly watches through the green channel entrance, in
order to escape from paying duty on the same.
*
  Ed. Note: In view of divergence of opinion in terms of separate judgments pronounced
by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Krishna Murari and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Karol, the
matter was directed to be placed Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for appropriate
orders.                                                                                  H
918            SUPREME COURT REPORTS                          [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A            3. On suspicion of the petitioner trying to smuggle goods through
      customs, a detailed examination of the person and baggage of the
      petitioner was conducted, and it resulted in the recovery of seven wrist
      watches, along with a few other high value goods. Since the petitioner
      appeared to have committed offences under Sections 132 and 135 of
      the Customs act, he was arrested on 05.10.2022. After the arrest, the
B
      petitioner herein then filed the present writ petition, wherein he sought
      for the issuance of directions for permission of home cooked food being
      granted to him.
             4. The petitioner, being an NRI, has been unable to travel outside
      India since 06.10.2022, and as such has been amenable to settle the
C     dispute by approaching the settlement commission under Section 127 of
      the Customs Act, by paying the dues and any interest accrued thereon
      to the customs department in accordance with law. However, for a want
      of notice by the customs authorities to initiate the settlement process,
      the petitioner filed an I.A. seeking the same.
D            5. In the abovementioned I.A. filed by the petitioner, an ex-parte
      order dated 20.02.2023 was passed by this Court, wherein the
      Commissioner of Customs was directed to issue a show-cause notice to
      the petitioner, to initiate the proceedings.
             6. The respondent then, on being served the abovementioned ex-
E     parte order, filed an application for a recall of the said order. Several
      grounds were raised on the issue of jurisdiction of the Settlement
      Commission to hear the said matter. Both the parties were heard at
      length, and vide order dated 20.02.2023, the said ex-parte order was
      recalled.
F           7. After the recall of order passed by this Court, both the parties
      argued at length on merits, and during the course of the said arguments,
      an apparent conflict between two judgments of the Bombay High Court
      and the Delhi High Court was brought to our notice by the petitioner, by
      way of an application for placing additional grounds, documents and
G     prayers. Thereafter, the matter was further argued on merits by the
      learned counsel for both the parties, and judgment was reserved.
            8. When the abovementioned conflict between the two High Court
      judgments was brought to our notice, it was pointed out to us by the
      learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that such conflict
      between the two High Court judgments, if left unnoticed, has the potential
H
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                919
                [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

to cause great harm to accused persons charged under the Customs               A
Act, and deprive them of the power to invoke the remedy of settlement.
      ANALYSIS
       9. The issue of settlement under the Customs Act, which will be
discussed by us in detail below, essentially has the power to grant an
accused a remedy to obtain immunity from prosecution and penalty as            B
provided under Section 127(H) of the Customs Act. Such a right, if it
remains under a cloud of ambiguity, may not only cause damage to the
fundamental rights accrued to accused persons to live a dignified life
without fear of incarceration, and may needlessly force certain accused
persons to be deprived of a free life outside the languish of custody.         C
Further, such a circumstance may also result in contrary views being
taken by different adjudicating authorities in identical cases, with similar
facts and circumstances.
       10. The Settlement Commission, governed by chapter XIV A of
the Customs Act, was inserted by virtue of Section 102 of the Finance          D
(No.2) Act, 1998 (Act No. XXI of 1998), with the aim of settling issues
of tax evasion by virtue of a disclosure by the tax offender. Such a
disclosure, if made bona fide, allowed for the tax evader to gain immunity
from either fine or penalty. While at first glance, it may seem that such
a provision allows for offenders to escape penal consequences with no
benefit caused to the government, however, a deeper analysis of the            E
provisions would prove otherwise. The withholding of tax by tax
offenders, unlike most other offences, directly impacts the revenue of
the country. Further, due to the complexities arising from such disputes,
the adjudication of the same often takes a very long time. In such a
scenario, wherein a long length of time consumed to resolve tax disputes       F
directly affects the revenue, and resultantly the welfare of the country,
the legislature found it imperative for the enactment of a beneficial and
time saving remedy, that would not only help the government in helping
reclaim the tax amounts due, but also incentivize persons to do the same.
It is out of these considerations that the Settlement Commission was
born, and as such, this backdrop must always be kept in mind while             G
adjudicating on issues of jurisdiction of the Settlement Commission.
      PRELIMINARY OBJECTION
      11. During the course of the hearing, a preliminary objection has
been raised by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent
                                                                               H
920             SUPREME COURT REPORTS                            [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     stating that since the original relief sought for was limited to the grant of
      providing home cooked meals to undertrial prisoners, this court is not the
      appropriate forum to decide on the present question of law and resolve
      the conflict between the two High Court judgments.
              12. In the present case at hand, as has been mentioned above, the
B     learned counsels appearing on behalf of both the parties have argued at
      length on the merits of the case and the point of law in question. The
      said ambiguity in the impugned point of law, caused by the conflicting
      decisions the two High Courts, has the potential to cause great harm to
      the fundamental rights of accused persons presently dealing with similar
      litigations, and future accused persons who might also have to deal with
C     similar litigations.
             13. In such a scenario, wherein such a length of time has been
      devoted by the parties and the court, this court sits in a unique position
      wherein it is equipped with all the necessary knowledge to clear the said
      ambiguity. If such an opportunity to clear the said ambiguity is not exercised
D     by this court, it would so happen that, at some point in the future, this
      court would again be tasked with answering the same question of law,
      for which, a great length of time would again be spent by the court, to
      complete the same task which could have been dealt with at an earlier
      time. Such a lack of exercise of its jurisdiction by the court would not
E     only increase the burden on the pendency of matters, but will also subject
      litigants from across the country to further pendency. It is therefore
      imperative that this court, at this instance, remedy such a mischief, to
      save the court and future litigants from multiplicity of proceedings and
      mischief caused by such ambiguity.
             14. In so far as maintainability of the present writ petition on
F
      grounds of deviation from the initial prayer is concerned, it has been held
      in a catena of judgments that this Court, under writ jurisdiction, is not
      bound by the relief sought and can go beyond the original relief in order
      to meet the ends of justice. Further, in such a situation where there is a
      conflict of opinion on a legal issue between two High Courts, mere
G     technical objections can not be allowed to stand in the way of exercising
      our powers conferred by way of Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
             15. The reason why Article 32 is given such importance is because
      the state as an organ, if left without checks and balances, has the potential
      to become a tyrannical institution that can take the civil and individual
H     liberties of its people for granted. To curb this inclination of the state at
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                921
                [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

its very roots, the constitutional scheme envisaged an organ within the        A
state machinery, namely the judicial organ, which is vested with the powers
to interfere with the tyrannical tendencies of the state. This organ, with
the Apex Court being at the helm of it, though functions within the state,
in cases of violations of fundamental rights, also combats against it.
       16. Further, the Constitution of India, amongst all the other rights    B
conferred by it, has placed civil and individual liberties at the highest
pedestal. These civil and individual liberties, that act as a sword and a
shield against the state, find their translation from ideal to enforceable
rights through Part III of the Constitution.
       17. One such right under Part III of the Constitution, which shields    C
its people from the tyranny of the state, is Article 32 of the Constitution,
which in itself is a fundamental right falling within part III of the
constitution, that exists to protect other fundamental rights. By way of
Article 32, any action of the state that violates the fundamental rights of
a person, or causes harm to civil or individual liberties, is within the
purview of scrutiny of the Court.                                              D

       18. During the constituent assembly debates, when the question
of the ambit of Article 32, which was then Article 25 of the draft
constitution, was posed, the makers of the Constitution deliberated
extensively on the scope of the said article and the extent of its powers.
It was during these debates when Dr. B.R Ambedkar, very famously               E
stated that Article 32 is the very soul of the constitution. The said quote
by Dr. B.R Ambedkar is being extracted herein:-
      “Now, Sir, I am very glad that the majority of those who spoke
      on this article have realised the importance and the
      significance of this article. If I was asked to name any                 F
      particular article in this Constitution as the most important–
      an article without which this Constitution would be a nullity–
      I could not refer to any other article except this one. It is the
      very soul of the Constitution and the very heart of it and I am
      glad that the House has realised its importance.”                        G
      19. Further, Father Jerome D’Souza, a Member of the Constituent
Assembly, while emphasizing on the importance of Article 32 of the
Constitution of India stated as follows:-
      “I should like to draw the attention of the House, Sir, to the
      implications of this article, implications which possibly are            H
922      SUPREME COURT REPORTS                         [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     not obvious at the first reading. This House, and through this
      House the Legislatures that have to rule this country in future,
      by a laudable and significant act of self-denial or self-
      abnegation, places under the power of a Supreme Judicature
      the enforcement of certain laws and certain principles, and
      remove them from the purview and the control of the
B
      Parliaments which will be elected in future years. They wish
      to put these rights beyond the possibility of attack or change
      which may be brought about by the passions and vicissitudes
      of party politics, by placing them under the jurisdiction of
      judges appointed in the manner provided for later on in this
C     Constitution. Sir, it is because we all believe,–and that is the
      implication of this chapter of fundamental Rights,–that man
      has certain rights that are inalienable, that cannot be
      questioned by any humanly constituted legislative authority,
      that these Fundamental Rights are framed in this manner and
      a sanction and a protection given to them by this provision
D
      for appeal to the Supreme Court.
      As I said, Sir, the implication of this is that an individual must
      be protected even against the collective action of people who
      may not fully appreciate his needs, his rights, his claims. And
      the sacredness of the individual personality, the claims of his
E     conscience, are, I venture to say, based upon a philosophy,
      an outlook on life which are essentially spiritual. Sir, if all
      our people and their outlook were entirely materialistic, if
      right and wrong were to be judged by a majority vote, then
      there is no significance in fundamental rights and the placing
F     of them under the protection of the High Court. It is because
      we believe that the fullest and the most integral definition of
      democracy includes and is based upon this sacredness of the
      individual, of his personality and the claims of his conscience,
      that we have framed these rights.
G     I say, Sir, further that in the last analysis we have to make an
      appeal to a moral law and through the moral law to a Supreme
      Being, if the highest and the fullest authority is to be given
      and the most stable sanction to be secured for these
      fundamental rights. Sir, Mahatma Gandhi, in one of his
      unforgettable phrases, referring to the desire to have a secular
H
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                 923
                [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

       Constitution and to avoid the name of the Supreme Being in               A
       it, cried out, “You may keep out the Name, but you will not
       keep out the Thing from that Constitution”. And, Sir, I believe
       that these fundamental rights and their implications are really
       tantamount to a confession that beyond human agencies and
       human legislatures there is a Power which has to be submitted
                                                                                B
       to, and there are rights which have to be respected.
       By this article we give to our Supreme Judicature a power, a
       status and a dignity which will call from them the highest
       qualities of integrity and uprightness. The full meaning of
       this article should be borne in mind when we come to that
       Part of the Constitution beginning with article 103, when we             C
       shall have to scrutinize the steps by which an upright and
       absolutely fair judiciary will be established in this land. When
       we consider that Part, let us recall these Rights and make
       sure that all these various provisions will be enforced in a
       just and fearless manner.”                                               D
       20. It is in this background that Article 32 of the Constitution of
India has been brought into force, to ensure that the Supreme Court is
always equipped to tackle the other organs of the state, especially in
circumstances wherein civil and individual liberties guaranteed by the
fundamental rights are at risk.                                                 E
       21. Further, It has come to our notice that in the cases of Additional
Commissioner of Customs v. Ram Niwas Verma1, Commissioner
of Customs v. Avinash Dawar & Anr 2, and Commissioner of
Customs v. Jyotsana Chikersal & Anr.3, the High Court of Delhi
has taken a contrary view from the decision of the Bombay High Court.           F
In my humble opinion, such an ambiguity in law has been caused because
of the lack of an authoritative pronouncement on the subject matter by
this Court. This lack of certainty in the law, has led to differential
outcomes of similarly situated persons in different jurisdictions.
     22. In such a circumstance, where similarly situated persons are           G
becoming victim to differential outcomes, this court must clarify such an
ambiguity, by resolving the conflict between the two sets of judgments,

1
  2015 SCC Online Del 11542
2
  2015 SCC Online Del 13875
3
  2019 SCC Online Del 6574                                                      H
924                SUPREME COURT REPORTS                        [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     to ensure that the mischief caused by the conflicting views is erased,
      and the certainty in law is restored.
            23. In light of the abovementioned discussions, we are not inclined
      to agree with the preliminary objections raised by the respondent,
      regarding maintainability of the petition on mere technicalities and
B     accordingly reject the same.
         CONFLICT BETWEEN THE TWO SETS OF HIGH
      COURT JUDGMENTS
              24. During the course of arguments on merits, the learned counsel
      appearing on behalf of the petitioner herein placed strong reliance on the
C     judgment of Union Of India vs Suresh Raheja & Ors4. The petitioner
      in the abovementioned case was caught trying to smuggle goods through
      the green channel of entry. The seizure of the impugned goods therein,
      similar to the present case at hand, was conducted within the customs
      area. Subsequent to the seizure, the petitioner therein was amenable to
D     settle the dues, and seek relief under Section 127 of the Customs Act,
      however, the goods seized were explicitly mentioned in Section 123 of
      the Customs Act, which put a bar on settlement of cases under Section
      127 B of the said Act. The relevant paragraph of the said judgement is
      being extracted herein:-

E               “It is further required to be borne in mind that in so far origin
                of the goods is concerned, there is no dispute in respect of
                both the jewellery as well as the watches. Therefore, the
                contention of the Petitioner that the Respondents had failed
                to discharge the burden cast by Section 123 of the said Act is
                mis-founded. Once the origin of the goods was not in dispute,
F               the Respondents as held by the Settlement Commission were
                entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commission
                and, therefore, the bar contained in the proviso to Section
                127B could not have come in their way. The finding of the:
                Settlement Commission in the aforesaid factual background
G               that the Respondents herein, who were the Applicants before
                the Settlement Commission, fulfill all the conditions laid down
                in Section 127(B) (1) of the said Act, can be said to be a
                possible view in the said factual background.”

      4
H         2011 (267) E.L.T. 487 (Bom.)
          YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                          925
                   [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

      25. While deciding on the said issue, it was held by the High Court   A
of Bombay that if an accused is caught within the customs area, the bar
on Section 127 of the Customs Act on goods mentioned under Section
123 of the same Act is redundant, and the accused is entitled to the
remedy of settlement.
       26. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, per       B
contra, relied on the judgement of Additional Commission of Customs
vs Ashok Kumar5. In this case, while the settlement application of the
petitioner was deemed to be maintainable, however, in paragraph 10 of
the said judgment, a passing reference was made by the court stating
that the goods found on the person of the petitioner, since they did not
find mention under Section 123 of the Customs Act, were not barred by       C
Section 127 of the same Act. The relevant paragraph of the
abovementioned judgment is being reproduced herein:-
          “It is not in dispute that the present case is not covered by
          any of the provisos to Section 127B(1) of the Act. In other
          words, it does not fall under any of the excluded categories      D
          of cases. It may be noted at this stage that the decision in
          Additional Commissioner of Customs v. Shri Ram Niwas Verma
          (supra), was a case where imported goods were covered under
          the third Proviso to Section 127B(1) and, therefore, the said
          decision is distinguishable on facts.”                            E
      27. To clear this cloud of ambiguity, and to settle the conflict
between these two sets of High Court judgments, we must first analyze
Section 123 and Section 127 B of the Customs Act. For the sake of
convenience, the relevant Sections are being reproduced herein:-
          “123. Burden of proof in certain cases.                           F
          (1) Where any goods to which this section applies are seized
          under this Act in the reasonable belief that they are smuggled
          goods, the burden of proving that they are not smuggled goods
          shall be—
          (a) in a case where such seizure is made from the possession      G
          of any person,—
          (i) on the person from whose possession the goods were seized;
          and
5
    2016 (336) E.L.T 224 (Del)                                              H
926      SUPREME COURT REPORTS                         [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     (ii) if any person, other than the person from whose possession
      the goods were seized, claims to be the owner thereof, also
      on such other person;
      (b) in any other case, on the person, if any, who claims to be
      the owner of the goods so seized.]
B
      (2) This section shall apply to gold 2[and manufactures
      thereof] watches, and any other class of goods which the
      Central Government may by notification in the Official
      Gazette, specify.

C     127B Application for settlement of cases.
      (1) Any importer, exporter or any other person (hereinafter
      referred to as the applicant in this Chapter) may, in respect of
      a case, relating to him make an application, before
      adjudication to the Settlement Commission to have the case
D     settled, in such form and in such manner as may be specified
      by rules, and containing a full and true disclosure of his duty
      liability which has not been disclosed before the proper officer,
      the manner in which such liability has been incurred, the
      additional amount of customs duty accepted to be payable by
      him and such other particulars as may be specified by rules
E     including the particulars of such dutiable goods in respect of
      which he admits short levy on account of misclassification,
      under-valuation or inapplicability of exemption notification 254
      [or otherwise] and such application shall be disposed of in
      the manner hereinafter provided: Provided that no such
F     application shall be made unless,—
      (a) the applicant has filed a bill of entry, or a shipping bill, in
      respect of import or export of such goods, as the case may
      be, and in relation to such bill of entry or shipping bill, a
      show cause notice has been issued to him by the proper officer;
G     (b) the additional amount of duty accepted by the applicant
      in his application exceeds three lakh rupees; and
      (c) the applicant has paid the additional amount of customs
      duty accepted by him along with interest due under section
      28AB:
H
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              927
                [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

      Provided further that no application shall be entertained by           A
      the Settlement Commission under this sub-section in cases
      which are pending in the Appellate Tribunal or any court:
      Provided also that no application under this sub-section shall
      be made in relation to goods to which section 123 applies or
      to goods in relation to which any offence under the Narcotic           B
      Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985)
      has been committed: Provided also that no application under
      this sub-section shall be made for the interpretation of the
      classification of the goods under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
      (51 of 1975).
                                                                             C
      (1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
      where an application was made under sub-section (1) before
      the 1st day of June, 2007 but an order under sub section (1)
      of section 127C has not been made before the said date, the
      applicant shall within a period of thirty days from the 1st day
      of June, 2007 pay the accepted duty liability failing which            D
      his application shall be liable to be rejected.”
       28. Section 123 of the Customs Act 1962, states that if an accused
is caught by the authorities in the act of smuggling goods, the burden of
proof, which originally vests with the prosecution, is reversed, and the
                                                                             E
same is transferred from the prosecution to the defense. In simpler terms,
this would mean that in such cases, it is the accused who is tasked with
proving his innocence, rather than the prosecution proving the accused
person’s guilt.
      29. This discharge of burden of proof, in our opinion, can only        F
happen in cases where there is a reasonable possibility of the accused
being innocent. In the present case at hand, the petitioner herein was
caught with the impugned goods within the customs area. In such a
scenario, where the impugned goods are found on the person of the
accused and within the customs area, any chance of the accused being
innocent becomes an impossibility, since the illegal act is caught in the    G
heat of the crime.
      30. Since the discharge of burden proof, rather, the question of
burden of proof itself becomes redundant in cases of seizures within the
customs area, by default, the provision that mandates such a task also
                                                                             H
928             SUPREME COURT REPORTS                           [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     becomes redundant. In light of the abovementioned discussion therefore,
      in cases of seizure within the customs area, Section 123 of the Customs
      Act cannot apply and hence, the decision in the Suresh Judgement
      (Supra) passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay states the
      correct position of law. It must also be noted that the abovementioned
      decision of the High Court of Bombay was impugned in appeal before
B
      this Court, and vide order dated 14.09.2011, this Court had concurred
      with the decision of the High Court and dismissed the appeal of the
      revenue. Since the facts and circumstances of the case herein are identical
      to the abovementioned case, we find no cogent reason to take a different
      view herein.
C
             31. In light of the abovementioned facts and discussions, we are
      of the opinion that judgment rendered by the High Court of Bombay in
      the Suresh judgment (Supra) expounds the correction position of law,
      and we concur and approve the same.
             32. While the conflict between the two sets of High Court
D
      judgments has been brought to an end, certain other issues flowing from
      the said interpretation, in our opinion, must also be clarified.
             33. The learned counsel for the respondent, through his submissions,
      contended that a non-declaration of goods, as mandated by Section 77
      of the Customs Act, ousts the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commission.
E
      To bring clarity to the said contention, we must first shed light on the two
      modes of clearance of incoming passengers, which are the red channel
      mode of entry and the green channel mode of entry.
             34. When an incoming passenger goes through customs verification,
F     he has two options of clearances, which are the red channel mode of
      entry and the green channel mode of entry. When an incoming passenger
      avails the red channel mode of entry, it is accepted by the passenger that
      they have goods that are liable for duty, and hence, by virtue of their
      own admission, are mandated declare the goods that require duty as per
      Section 77 of the Customs Act.
G
             35. If a passenger opts for the green channel mode of entry, it
      implies that the passenger, by virtue of not opting for the red channel
      mode of entry, is stating that he has no goods that are liable to duty, and
      hence, it is deemed that they are making a declaration under Section 77
      of the Customs Act of carrying “Nil” dutiable goods.
H
          YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                           929
                   [KRISHNA MURARI, J.]

       36. However, if a passenger decides to opt for the green channel      A
of entry, but, is still found with goods that are subject to the levy of
duty, they become liable to confiscatory and penal action as per the
Customs Act. Since they become subject to the penal provisions of the
Customs Act, by default, it must also be implied that they are given the
benefit of settlement as per the same Act. No surgery in such a scenario     B
can be done, wherein the accused is held liable of the penal
consequences of the act, however, is denied the benefit of remedy
under the same Act.
       37. Further, if we were to accept the proposition that a non-
declaration under Section 77 of the Customs Act would automatically          C
bar the incoming passenger from availing the benefit of settlement, in
light of our observation that an entry through the green channel mode
implies a declaration of “Nil” goods under Section 77 of the Act , the
provision of settlement would become irrelevant and defunct, since no
accused would ever be able to avail the benefits of settlement.
                                                                             D
       38. Therefore, in light of the above discussion, we see no reason
as to why such a person cannot opt for a statutory remedy of settlement,
and therefore reject the objection of the respondents in this regard.
       39. We then come to the last issue that warrants our consideration.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent contended          E
that any person who importing the impugned goods at the instance of
another person, is a smuggler, and as such, the Settlement Commission
cannot be approached in such cases.
       40. This contention made by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondents, in our opinion, is also bad in law. In the case   F
of Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd vs Union Of India 20066,
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, while deciding on a similar
issue, by relying on the Constitution Bench judgment of this court in the
case of Lilavati Bai v. State Of Mysore7, gave the phrase “or otherwise”,
as mentioned in Section 127 B of the Act, an expansive interpretation,       G
and held that the jurisdiction of the Settlement Commission can be invoked
by a person who has committed smuggling, fraud or deliberate

6
    (201) ELT 529 (Bom)
7
    AIR 1957 SC 521                                                          H
930             SUPREME COURT REPORTS                            [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     misdeclaration. The relevant paragraph of the judgment delivered by the
      High Court of Bombay is being reproduced herein:-
            “46..... On the contrary, in the Customs Act, the provision
            makes it mandatory that the Applicant can file an application
            only after show cause notice is issued, which show cause
B           notice as we have pointed out hereinabove, would pertain
            even to confiscation. i.e. to say the person who has committed
            fraud or smuggling or deliberate misdeclaration would only
            receive such show cause notice and such a show cause notice
            is essential ingredient before making an application.…”
C            41. Further, the abovementioned judgment of the Bombay high
      court was impugned in the Supreme Court by way of an appeal, and the
      same was dismissed by this Court vide order dated 03.08.2011, further
      fortifying the judgment of the High Court.
             42. On the basis of the abovementioned discussions, we are of
D     the opinion that the contention of the respondent even in this regard is
      liable to be rejected.
            CONCLUSION
             43. By way of additional submissions made by the petitioner, it
E     has been brought to our notice that the Commissioner of Customs has
      issued a show cause notice to the petitioner. Since a show cause notice
      has already been issued, no direction is that regard is warranted. If an
      application of settlement is filed by the petitioner, the same shall be dealt
      with by the Settlement Commission on its own merits and in accordance
      with law and the procedure prescribed u/s 127H of the Customs Act.
F     However, we deem it appropriate to observe that, if at all, the Settlement
      Commission would deem fit, it can always seek further report from the
      “Commission (Investigation)” appointed within the Settlement Commission
      even after issuance of the show cause notice for this one time opportunity
      of settlement.
G           44. We refrain from making any observations on the merits of
      the case and leave the same for consideration by the Settlement
      Commission.
            45. The Writ petition along with application therein are,
      accordingly, disposed of.
H
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                  931


       SANJAY KAROL, J.                                                          A
      1. I have perused the erudite opinion proposed by my esteemed
brother, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Krishna Murari. Respectfully, I am unable
to persuade myself to agree; hence, I separately pen down my
conclusions.
       2. Two issues arise for consideration before us; One whether a            B
settlement remedy under Section 127B of the Customs Act, 1962, would
be available for the seized goods, which are specified under Section 123
of the said Act? Two, would, in the attending facts, the exercise of
powers under Article 32 of the Constitution of India be appropriate?
       Nature, Scope, Purpose and Scheme of Customs Act                          C

       3. The Customs Act, 1962 (hereafter referred to as the Act) was
enacted to consolidate the provisions relating to sea customs, land
customs and air customs into one comprehensive measure. It is an act
to sternly and expeditiously deal with smuggled goods and curbs the
dents on the revenue thus caused. The act provides for the confiscation          D
of goods and imposition of penalties when any goods are imported contrary
to prohibitions imposed [Commissioner of Customs v. M. Ambalal,
(2011) 2 SCC 74 (2-Judge Bench)].
       4. To understand the legislative intent behind the Act, it is important
to discuss the scheme therein.                                                   E

       5. Chapter II of the Act relates to the appointment of customs
officers and their powers under the Act.
       6. Chapter III specifies the appointment of customs ports and
airports wherein imported goods shall be unloaded, and export goods              F
shall be loaded & cleared.
      7. Chapter IV empowers the Central Government to prohibit
the importation or exportation of goods for the purposes mentioned
therein, such as maintaining the security of India and preventing
smuggling.                                                                       G
      8. Chapter IVA provides for the detection of illegally imported
goods and the prevention of their disposal.
     9. Chapter V specifies the imposition of customs duties and
exemption therefrom.
                                                                                 H
932              SUPREME COURT REPORTS                           [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A           10. Chapter VII pertains to the clearance of imported and exported
      goods. This chapter also deals with the procedure employed when goods
      are not cleared.
            11. Chapter XI elucidates special provisions regarding baggage,
      goods imported or exported, and the required declaration. In this Chapter,
B     Section 83 allows for the duty rate and tariff to be imposed on goods
      imported or exported.
             12. Chapter XIII provides for powers relating to searches, seizure
      and arrest. In this Chapter, an officer of customs is empowered to arrest
      a person under Section 105 if he has reason to believe that such a person
C     may have made a false declaration (Section 132), obstructed a customs
      officer (Section 133) or evaded customs duty that is liable to be paid
      (Section 135). Furthermore, Section 108B penalises failure to furnish
      information as directed by the proper officer.
            13. Chapter XIV allows for the confiscation of goods and the
D     imposition of penalties. Sections 111 and 112 thereunder enumerate a list
      of goods which are liable for confiscation and the penalty thereof. Section
      123 reverses the burden of proofs of certain specified seized goods.
               14. Chapter XIVA contains the mechanism for the settlement of
      cases.
E            15. Chapter XVI of the Act lays down offences and prosecution
      under the Customs Act. This chapter imposes, as a penalty, imprisonment
      for certain offences. They are: making a false declaration relating to
      customs (Section 132; may extend to 1 year), obstruction of an officer
      of customs (Section 133; may extend to 1 year), refusal to be X-rayed
      (Section 134; may extend to 6 months) and evasion of duty or prohibitions
F     (Section 135; may extend to seven years).
             16. Given the above, it is evident that the scheme of the act involves
      the imposition of customs duty, confiscation of goods and consequences
      of skirting or attempting to skirt the same in the form of varied penal
      consequences, including imprisonment. This follows the purpose of the
G     Act, as noted by this Court in Ambalal (supra), which is to sternly and
      expeditiously deal with goods smuggled into India in contravention of the
      prohibitions within the law.
             17. Considering the intention of the Act as above, I now discuss
      the sections pertaining to the controversy at hand: Section 123 and Section
H     127B of the Act.
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                 933
                 [SANJAY KAROL, J.]

       18. Section 123 of the Act elucidates the burden of proof in certain     A
cases. It reads as follows:
      “123. Burden of proof in certain cases.—
      (1) Where any goods to which this section applies are seized
      under this Act in the reasonable belief that they are smuggled
      goods, the burden of proving that they are not smuggled goods             B
      shall be—
      (a) in a case where such seizure is made from the possession
      of any person,—
      (i) on the person from whose possession the goods were seized;            C
      and (ii) if any person, other than the person from whose
      possession the goods were seized, claims to be the
      ownerthereof, also on such other person;
      (b) in any other case, on the person, if any, who claims to be
      the owner of the goods so seized.                                         D
      (2) This section shall apply to gold [and manufactures
      thereof],watches, and any other class of goods which the
      Central Government may by notification in the Official
      Gazette, specify.”
       19. Section 127B of the Act pertains to the application procedure        E
for the settlement of cases by a person in respect of a case pending
adjudication. Importantly, the proviso to the said states that no application
shall be made concerning goods to which Section 123 applies. It reads
as follows:
      “127B. Application for settlement of cases.—                              F
      (1) Any importer, exporter or any other person (hereinafter
      referred to as the applicant in this Chapter) may, in respect of
      a case, relating to him make an application, before
      adjudication to the Settlement Commission to have the case
      settled, in such form and in such manner as may be specified              G
      by rules, and containing a full and true disclosure of his duty
      liability which has not been disclosed before the proper officer,
      the manner in which such liability has been incurred, the
      additional amount of customs duty accepted to be payable by
      him and such other particulars as may be specified by rules               H
934            SUPREME COURT REPORTS                          [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A           including the particulars of such dutiable goods in respect of
            which he admits short levy on account of misclassification,
            under-valuation or inapplicability of exemption notification
            [or otherwise] and such application shall be disposed of in
            the manner hereinafter provided :
B           Provided that no such application shall be made unless,—
                (a) the applicant has filed a bill of entry, or a shipping
                bill, in respect of import or export of such goods, as the
                case may be, and in relation to such bill of entry or shipping
                bill, a show cause notice has been issued to him by the
C               proper officer;
                (b) the additional amount of duty accepted by the applicant
                in his application exceeds three lakh rupees; and
                (c) the applicant has paid the additional amount of customs
                duty accepted by him along with interest due under section
D               28AB:
            Provided further that no application shall be entertained by
            the Settlement Commission under this sub-section in cases
            which are pending in the Appellate Tribunal or any court :
            Provided also that no application under this sub-section shall
E           be made in relation to goods to which section 123 applies or
            to goods in relation to which any offence under the Narcotic
            Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985)
            has been committed : Provided also that no application under
            this sub-section shall be made for the interpretation of the
F           classification of the goods under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
            (51 of 1975).”
                                                      (Emphasis Supplied)
             20. The Petitioner contends that Section 123 of the Act would not
      apply in the present case for Settlement, as the goods of admitted foreign
      origin stand seized within the customs area upon crossing the green
G
      channel. The Petitioner has placed reliance on the judgment of the
      Bombay High Court in Union of India v. Suresh Raheja, 2011 (267)
      E.L.T. 487 (Bom.), wherein the High Court observed that in a situation
      where there is no dispute as to the origin of the goods, the bar contained
      in the proviso to Section 127B would not come in the way, in respect of
H     the specified goods under Section 123.
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                935
                 [SANJAY KAROL, J.]

       21. Furthermore, the Petitioner contends that the legislative object    A
is to open doors for settlement and not to rigidly construe beneficial
provisions in a mechanical manner that would prevent settlement of cases.
      Analysis and Reasoning
       22. This is the plan and simple construction of the statute. On a
plain reading of Sections 127B and 123, it is evident that the proviso to      B
Section 127B(1) specifies certain categories of goods are barred from
the jurisdiction of the settlement commission. These include goods
mentioned under Section 123 and goods relating to the NDPS Act.
Therefore, recourse under Section 127B cannot be made if any of the
above goods are involved                                                       C
      23. Even without any controversy about the origin of the goods,
Section 127B of the Act would not apply for settlement in respect of the
goods enumerated under Section 123 as this goes against the statutory
scheme of penal consequences for committing certain offences such as
for evading duty, as alleged in the present case, under Section 135.           D
       24. Hence, the contention of the Petitioner that the legislative
intent is for settlement of all cases cannot be accepted.
       25. Further, Section 127B lays down specific conditions for its
application, and the proviso provides categories of goods wherein
settlement cannot be undertaken. This makes it evident that Section            E
127B is not meant to be applied in all categories of cases. Only in the
following circumstances can an application be made to the settlement
commission:
      a)     the applicant has filed a bill of entry, or a shipping bill, in
             respect of the import or export of such goods, as the case        F
             may be, and in relation to such bill of entry or shipping bill,
             a show cause notice has been issued to him by the proper
             officer;
      (b)    the additional amount of duty accepted by the applicant in
             his application exceeds three lakh rupees;                        G
      (c)    the applicant has paid the additional amount of customs duty
             accepted by him along with interest due under section 28AB:
             and
      (d)    the proviso to Section 127B is not attracted.
                                                                               H
936            SUPREME COURT REPORTS                          [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A            26. Furthermore, as discussed above, the scheme of the Act
      involves payment of fines and/or imprisonment for offences enumerated
      under Chapter XVI. All offences, under the Act, cannot be permitted to
      go before the Settlement Commission under Section 127B. This would
      make the legislative intent behind the proviso to Section 127B, which
      bars certain goods, including those mentioned under Section 123 and
B
      goods which are prohibited under the Narcotic Drugs Psychotropic
      Substances Act, 1985, redundant. Importantly, as a consequence of such
      an interpretation being accepted, the power to prohibit the importation of
      goods for the maintenance of security of India under Section 11, the
      powers of arrest under Section 105, the power to summon under Section
C     108, confiscation under Section 111 and offences for which imprisonment
      may be given from Sections 132 to Section 135 would have no application,
      thereby making the respective legislative provisions in effect, null. As
      prayed for by the Petitioner, such an interpretation would allow a person
      importing goods without declaration to evade confiscation and criminal
      prosecution by simply taking recourse under Section 127B. The deterrent
D     of criminal prosecution would stand vitiated.
             It is observed that the Delhi High Court has taken a view contrary
      to that taken by the Bombay High Court in this regard.
            26.1 In Additional Commissioner of Customs v. Ram Niwas
E     Verma, 2015 SCC Online Del 11542 (2-Judge Bench of the Delhi
      High Court), there was a recovery of 6452 grams of gold from the
      Respondent therein. He was crossing through the green channel but
      was intercepted by the Customs Officer. The Court stated that it is
      evident that no application for settlement can be made if it relates to
      goods to which S.123 applies.
F
             26.2 In Commissioner of Customs v. Avinash Dawar & Anr.,
      2015 SCC Online Del 13875 (2-Judge Bench of the Delhi High Court),
      the Settlement Commission held that since there is an admission of illicit
      importation, shifting of burden as contemplated under Section 123 of
      Customs Act, is not required. The Court, while setting aside this order,
G     stated that upon a plain reading of the provisions, an application under
      Section 127B could not be made in respect of ‘gold’, which is specifically
      an item listed under Section 123 applies.
            26.3 The decisions in Ram Niwas Verma (Supra) and Avinash
      Dawar (Supra) have been followed in Commissioner of Customs v.
H     Jyotsna Chikersal and Anr., 2019 SCC Online Del 6574 (2-Judge
       YAMAL MANOJBHAI v. UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                937
                 [SANJAY KAROL, J.]

Bench of the Delhi High Court)where a recovery of 6 gold bars was              A
made from the Respondent therein. No declaration or disclosure was
made in the disembarkation slip or the customs area. The Court held
that a conjoint reading of these two provisions clearly bears out that the
jurisdiction of the Commission to settle cases involving goods referred to
in Section 123(2) is excluded.
                                                                               B
      26.4 Significantly, in the abovementioned cases, the decision of
the Delhi High Court in Commissioner of Customs v. Ashok Kumar
Jain, 2013 (292) ELT 32 (Del), wherein settlement application under
127B was allowed for watches recovered, has been distinguished on the
ground that the said decision did not consider Section123 and the
consequent bar therein.                                                        C
       26.5 It is also pertinent to note that the reasoning in Suresh Raheja
(supra) was given in the facts and circumstances of that case, wherein
the entire baggage, including the watches, had become wet and affected
by the floods.
                                                                               D
       27. In the present case, the recovery from the Petitioner was on
crossing the green channel at the Delhi airport on 05.10.2022, wherein
the officers of the Investigating Agency apprehended him with dutiable
goods, including watches of admitted foreign origin. Watches is one of
the categories of goods mentioned in Section 123 of the Act. Since there
is a recovery of goods to which Section 123 applies, the same is a bar         E
for the Petitioner to approach the Settlement Commission. The matter,
in my view, is fit to be remitted to the adjudicating authorities to take
appropriate action, as per law.
      Writ Jurisdiction under Article 32
       28. I have considered the law on the merits of the dispute; however,    F
it is also essential to consider the maintainability of the present
proceedings since the Petitioner has invoked Article 32 of the Constitution
of India.
      29. It is well-settled law that this Court has wide powers when
the violation of fundamental rights is alleged under Article 32 of the         G
Constitution. However, such intervention must be made on a case-by-
case basis and only when a fundamental right question arises.
      30. In Northern Corporation v. Union of India, (1990) 4
SCC 239 (2-Judge Bench), this Court dealing with the issue of
enforcement of the provisions of the Customs Act, in a petition filed          H
938              SUPREME COURT REPORTS                              [2023] 4 S.C.R.


A     under Article 32, observed that the Petitioner has no fundamental right
      as such to clear any goods imported in accordance with the law.
      Furthermore, it was held that it could not be contended that enforcing
      provisions of the Act would breach fundamental rights which entitle a
      citizen to seek recourse to Article 32 of the Constitution. Therefore, the
      writ petition was rejected.
B
            31. In Dalip Singh v. State of U.P. & Ors., (2010) 2 SCC 114
      (2-Judge Bench), the imperative nature of putting forward all facts and
      seeking an appropriate relief was reiterated.
             32. The Petitioner approached this Court through Writ Petition
C     No. 55/2023, praying only for the grant of a writ of mandamus for home-
      cooked food for under-trial prisoners (This question is pending
      consideration by this Court in other writ petitions). Only subsequently
      was an Interlocutory Application filed seeking the relief concerning the
      merits of the present dispute, i.e. direction to Respondent No. 2 (Customs
      Authority) for settlement under Section 127B of the Customs Act, 1962.
D
             33. This approach taken by the Petitioner, in my view, is
      unwarranted and undesirable if not malafide for not exhausting the
      appropriate alternative remedies. Under the garb of relief purportedly
      relating to fundamental rights, the relief sought in the instant IA, is statutory
      in nature- under the Act i.e. for an application of settlement to be decided.
E
             34. Recourse to the fundamental right to approach this Court has
      to be permitted in cases where the fundamental rights of the Petitioner
      have been infringed. Herein, no such infringement is made out. No
      material has been brought on record displaying that the Customs
      Department has proceeded in a manner contravening the Constitutional
F     mandate.
             35. Therefore, given the above, the present application is liable to
      be dismissed on maintainability. It is also to be noted that the practice of
      circumventing the well-established principles for the exercise of the power
      of Article 32 should not be encouraged.
G
             In the abovementioned terms, the writ petition, along with
      interlocutory applications, are disposed of.

      Divya Pandey                                Matter to be placed before Hon’ble CJI.
      (Assisted by : Roopanshi Virang, LCRA)
H
