3 S.C.R.        SUPREME COURT REPORTS                        369
                                                                         196!
        KAMESHWAR PRASAD AND OTHERS
                                                                      February 22.
                              v.
     THE STATE OF BIHAR AND ANOTHER
     (P. B. GA.JENDRAGADKAR, A. K. SARKAR, K. N.
            WANCHOO, K. C. DAS GUPTA and
             N. RAJAGOPALA AYYANGAR, .JJ.)
      Government Servant-Participation in strike.9 or demonstra•
tions-Rule prohibiting strikes or demonstrations pertaining
to conditions of service-Oondtutional validity of rule-
 "Detnonstration". meaning of-Bihar Governm,ent Servants'
Conduct Rules, 1956, r. 4-A-Constitution of India,
Art•. 19(1)(a), 19(1)(b), J.9(1) (c), 33, 309.
       By a notification dated August 16, 1957, the Government
of    Bihar introduced r. 4-A into the Bihar Gevernment
Servani:s' Conduct Rules, ! 956, which provided "No Govern-
ment servant shall partjcipate in any demonstration or resort
to any form of strike in connection with any matter pertaining
to his conditions of service." The appellants filed a petition
before the High Court of Patna under Art. 226 of the Con-
stitution   of India challenging the ,validity of the rule on the
grounds, inter alia, that it violated sub-els. (a), (b) and (c) of
Art. 19 and that, in coniequence, the rule was in excess of the
rule making power conferred by Art. 309. The High Court
took the view that the freedom guaranteed under Arts. 19 (1)
(a' and 19 (1) (c) did not include a right to demonstrate or to
strike so far as servants of Government were concerned, 3.nd
that in any case, the impugned rule was saved as impo3ing
reasonable restrictions.
      He.ld, that r. 4·A of the Bihar Government Servants'
Conduct Rules, 1956, in so far as it prohibited any form of
dernostration, be it however innocent or however incapable of
causing a breach of public tranquillity, was vioiative of Arts.
19 (1) (a) and 19(l)(b) of the Constitution of India, and since
on t~1e language of the rule as it stood it was not possible to so
read it as to separate the legal from the unconstitutional por-
tion of the provision, the entire rule relating to participation in
any demonstration must he declared as ultre vlrcs.
      T/1e Superintendant, Central Pri8on, Fetehgarh v. Ram
Marw/iar Lohia, [1960] 2 S. C.R. 821, relie~ on.
      The Constitution has under Art. 33, selected two of the
Services uncier the State, the ~trnbers ~f WJiich might b~
                    370 SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1962] SUPP.
                    deprived of the benefit of the fundamental rights guaranteed
                    to other persons and citizens and also has prescribed the limit~
Karruthwar fraxad
                    within which such rcscrictions or abrogation might take place;
       ••
~ Staft Qj Bfl1ar   but the ocher clau'iscs of servants of Govcrn1nent in co1nmon
                    with other persons and citizens of the country cannot be exclu·
                    <led from the protection of the rights guaranteed by part JI I
                    by reason 1nerely of their being Govern1nent scr\'ants, though
                    on account of nature and incidents of the duties \vhich they
                    have to discharge in that capacity, certain restrictions on their
                     freedoms rnight have to be imposed.

                          Heid, further, that the rule in so far as it prohibited
                    strikes v.•as valid, because there was no fundamental right t0
                    resort to a strike.
                          All India Rllnk /~1npl1Jyers' Asaocir1tion v. _,1 ationrzl Indus·
                    trial Tribunal, (1962] 3 S.C.R. 269, followed.
                            Civil Az>pellate .l'llrisdfrtion: Civil Appeal Xo.
                     41.l of 1959.
                           Appeal from the judgment and decree dated
                     ,July 7, 19.~8, of the Patn:t High Court in ~I. ,J.C.
                     ~o. 456 of 1957.

                            B. P. Jfoheshwari, for the appellants.
                            S. P. Va;-ma, for the rcspowlrnts.
                            B. Sen and R.H. Dhchar, for the Intervener
                     No. l (Cnion of India).
                            A. S. R. Chari, M. K. Rammni1rthi, R. K. Garg,
                     ]). P. Singh and S. C. Agarwal, for the Inwn·ener
                     No 2 (E. X. Joseph).
                                                                                              •
                            1962. February 22.             The Judgment of the
                      Court was delivered by
                            AYYA:XGAR, J.-This appeal comes beforo. us
                      by virtue of a certificate of fitness grnntNI under
                      Art. 132 of the Constitution by the High Court of
                      Patna. The question involve<! in the app<•al is a
                      8 hort ono but is of considerable puhlic importance
                      and of great constitutional significance. ft. i~ con·
                      cerned with the constitutional validity of r. 4·A,
        3S.C.R.      SUPREME COURT REPORTS                371
        which was introduced into the Bihar Government                 1962
        Servants' Conduct Rules, 1956; by a notification         Kamechwar Prasad
        of the Governor of Bihar dated August 16, 1957                  v.
                                                                 The Slate of Bihar
        and reads:
                                                                    A;:yan:ar J,
                  "4~A.-Demonstrations and strikes.-
                   No Government servant shall participate
              in any demonstration or resort to any form of
              strike in connection with any matter pertain-
              ing to his conditions of service."            ·
              Very soon after this rule was notified the six
l       appellants, the first of whom is the President of the
        Patna Secretariat Ministerial Officers' Association
        and the others are Assistants or Clerks under the
        Bihar State Government, filed on August 26, 1957,
        a petition before the High Court of Patn'l under
        Art. 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity
        of the rule on various grounds including inter alia
        that it interfered with the rights guaranteed to the
        petitioners by sub-els. (a), (bl and (c) of cl. (l) of
        Art. 19 of the Constitution of India and that in
        consequence the rule was in excess of the rule-
        making power conferred by Art. 30:J of the Consti-
        tution which "·as the source of the authority enabl-
        ing service-rules to be framed. They prayed for an
        order restraining the respondent-State from giving
        effect to the rule and to desist from interfering with
        the petitioners' right to go on strike or to hold
        demonstrations. The learned Judges of the High
    •   Court who heard the petition were of the opinion
        that the freedom guaranteed under Art. 19( l)(a) and
        19(l)(cl of the Constitution did not include a right
        to resort to a strike or the right to demonstnte so
        far as sevants of Government were concerned. ·The
        learned Judges however, further considered the
        validity of the rule on the assumption that the
        freedoms enumerated in sub-els. (a) and (c) of Art.
        19(1) did include those rights. On this basis they
        held that the rule impugned was saved as being
        reason~ble restraints on these guaranteed freedoms,

-
                      372 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1962) SUPP.
       1962           The learn°d Judges therefore directed the petition        •
ltameJhrt;Qr P,au1d   to Le di~missed, but on application by the a ppell:ints
        v.            thoy granted 11 certificate und<'r Art. 132 of the
The Stale of Bihar
                      Constitution to enable them to approach tliis Court.
  A}yan111f' J.
                            At this stage it is necessary to mention that a
                      similar conclusion as the one by the High Court of
                      Patna· now under appeal wa.s reached by the learned       .•
                      Judges of tho High Court of Romhay before whom
                      the constitutional validitv of a rn le in identical
                      terms as r. 4A of the Bihar Rul<'s was impugned.
                      The correctneRS of th:it decision is unrfor chnll<'nge
                      in this Court in S.L Ps. (Civil) Nos. 40\J »nd 500 of
                      19til and the appellants in that app1·al sought leave
                      to intervene in this appeal and we ha,_.,, permitted
                      them t-0 do RO, and we heard '.\Ir. Chari-learned
                      Crmnoel for the int~rveners in furl her ~upport of
                      the appeal.
                            Before entering on a di~cussion of tho a,rgu-
                      ments adv:mced before us it might be eonvenient
                      to state certain matter~ which are common ground
                      and not in controversy :
                            (I) The impui,,'lled rule 4-A was framed under
                      Art. 309 of tho Con8titution which enact~. to quote
                      the material words :
                                 "300. Subied to tho provision" of this
                            Constitution, Acts of the appropri11te Legisla-
                            ture may regulate the rceruit1rn·nt, and condi-
                            tions of service of persons appointed, to public
                                  .                       ,,                    '
                            scrvtC(\,S .. .•.....•.....
                      ancl provision i~ made hy tho proviRo to thi> Article
                      for tlw Governorn of States to make JU!t's until
                      "provision in that ~chalf i~ macle .!':V or unrfor .an
                      Act of the appropriate Leg1slalur<, . We are <lrnwmg
                      att~ntion to the Artidc under which th(' rnlo is
                      mad(' for the purposP of pointing out that the rule-
                      making power being snhj.,ct to the Cntrntit.utio1;,
                      the validit.y of the rulo would have to b" tested
                      by the saml' criteria as aro applicable to all !:1~s
                      and subordinate legislation. In other wor<ls, 1f
    3 S.C.R.          SUPREME COURT REPORTS           373
                                                                     1962
    there are any constitutional limitations npon law-
    making, such of them as are appropriate to the            Kameshwar Prasad
                                                                      v.
    subject dealt with by the rule would be applicable        The State of B1'har
    to them.
                                                                 Ayyanzar J.
            (2) It would be seen that the rule prohibits
    two types of activities, both in connection with
    matters pertaining to the conditions of service (i) the
    holding of demonstrations, and (ii) resort to strikes
    to achieve the purpose indicated. This Court had,
     in All India Banlc Emplnyees' Association v. National
     Industrial Tribunal (') (Bank disputes Bombay
     etc.), to consider the question as to whether the
     right to form an association guaranteed by Art.
     19( l) (c) involved or implied the right to resort to
     a strike a,nd answered it in the negative. In view
     of this decision learned Counsel for the appellants,
     as also Mr. Chari for the interveners confined their
     arguments to the question of the legality of the
     provision as regards the right "to hold demons-
     trations". The validity of the rule therefore in so
     far as it prohibits strikes, is no longer under
     challenge.
             The argument addressed to us on bl'half of the
     appellants may be shortly stated thus : The eervice-
     rule being one framed under Art. 309 is a "law"
     within the definitiun of Art. 13(3) of the Constitu-
      tion and it would have to be pronounced invalid
      to the extent that it is inconsistent with the provi-
      sions of Part III. of the Constitution Art. 13(2).
      Article 19(1) confers on all citizens the right by
      sub-cl. (a) to freedom of speech and expression, and
      by sub-cl. (b) to assemble peacefully and without
      arms, and the rightto"demonstrate"would be covered
      by these two sub-clauses. By the ,mere fact that a
      person enters Government service, he does not
      cease to be "a citizen of India", nor does that
      disentitle him to claim the freedoms guaranteed
      to every citizen. In fact, Art. 33 which enacts :
•                 "Parliament may by law determine to
       (I) CJ.A; 154 of 1961 (Not yet reported).
                     374 SOPREME COURT REPORTS (1962] SuP~.
       JYG2
                           wh11t extent any of the rights conferred by
Kam11hw.rr l'rasad         this Part shall, in their application to the
         ••
The Sl•U of Bihar          members of the Armed Forces or tho Forces
                           charged with maintenance of public order, be
  ..i/~·a :;ar J.          restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the
                           proper discharge of their duties and the main-
                           tenance of discipline among them.,.
                     obviously procC'eds on the basis of personH in the
                     service of Government being entitled to the Protec-
                     tion of tho fundamental rights guaranteed by Part
                     III of the Constitution and iB inserted to <·nable
                     special provi;ion being made fur the abrogation, if
                     necessary, of thn guarant-0ed freedoms in the ease
                     of two special scrd<;cs only, viz., the army :u:d the
                     police force. The approach to the queRt.i<in regard-
                     ing the constitutionality of the rule should be
                     whether the ban that it imposes on demonstrations
                     would be covered by the limitation of the guaran-
                     teed rights contained in Art. 19(2) and 19(::!). In
                     regard to both these clauses the only relevant
                     criteria which has been suggested by the respon-
                     dent-State iH that the rule is framed •·in the interest
                     of public order". A demonstration may be defined
                     as "an expres8ion of one's feelings by outward
                     signs". A demonstration such as is prohibited by,
                     the rule may be of the most innocent type- peaceful
                      orderly such as the mere wearing of a badge by a.
                     Government servant or even by a silent afSem bly say
                      outside oflice hours-demonstrations which could
                      in no sense be suggested to involve any breach of
                      tranquillity, or of a type involving incitement to or
                      capable of lea.ding to disorder. If the rule had
                      confined itself to demonstrations of type which
                      would lead to disorder then the validity of that rule
                      could havo been sustained but what the rule does is
                      the imposition of a blanket-ban on all demonstra-
                      tions of whatever type-innocent ae well as other-
                      wise-and in consequence its validity cannot be
                      upheld.
                            Before considering these arguments of learned
                                                                               -
     3s.c.R.          SUPREME COURT REPORTS               375

      Counsel it is necessary to deal with the submission               196B
      by Mr. Sen who appeared for the Union of India             Kameshwar Prastld
      who intervened in this appeal which, if accepted,                   v.
                                                                 Tiu S t•I• of Bihar
      would cut at the· root of the entire argument for
      the appellant. He endeavoured to persuade us to               Ayyangar J.
      hold that though the power to frame Service Rules
      under Art. 309 was subject to the Constitution with
      the result that the rules so framed ought not to be
       contrary to any constitutional provision, still it did
       not follow that every one of the fundamental rights
      guaranteed by Part III could be claimed by a
       Government servant. He urged that as a person
       voluntarily entered Government service he must by
      that verj act be demeed to have consented to errter
      that service on such reasonable conditions as might
      be framed ·for ensuring the proper working of the
      administrative machinery of the Government and
      for the proper maintenance of discipline in the
      Service itself. Under Art. 310 every office is held,
      subject to the provisions of the Constitution, at the
      pleasure of the President or of the Governor as the
       case may be, and provided a rule regulating the
      conditions of service was reasonable and was calcu-
      lated to ensure the purposes above-named he sub-
      mitted that its reasonableness and validity could
      not be tested solely by reference to the criteria laid
      down in ols.(2}, (3) or (4) of Art. 19.
             In this connection we were referred to a few
      decisions of the American Courts· for the proposi-
      tion that the constitutionality of special rules enact-
      ed for the discipline of those in the service of Govern-
      ment had to be tested by criteria different from those
      applicable to ordinary citzens. Thus in 'f!Jx Parle;
      Curtis (') the constitutionality of a law prohibiting
      officers or employees of the United S~ates from
      "requesting, giving to or receiving from any other
      officer or employee of the government any money
    . or property or other thing of value for political
-     purposes," under a penalty of being discharged and,
      on conviction fined, was upheld. In the majority
       (I) 27 Law. Ed. 232, 106 U. S. 371.
                     376 SUPREME COURT REPORTS                   fl!l62] SUPP.
      1962           judgment which was delivered by Waite, C.J., the
KouuslrUJar PrOJ•i   rcasonablen('ss of such a rule is pointed out. It is
        v.           however manifest that no fundamrntal right could
Tht Stak of Bilw
                     be claimed to havP been infringed by the provision
   Auyongar J•       there impugned. In United l'ublic Worker" v.
                      Mitdull ('), which was another caso to which our
                      attention was invited, ono of the questiuns raised
                      related to the validity of an Act of Congress (The
                      Hatch Act, 1940) making it unlawful for the emplo-
                      yees in the Executive Branch of the .Federal
                      Government to take part in political campaigns 11.nd
                      making the same the basis for disciplinary depart-
                      mental action. It was eontended that thi" wa8 an
                      interference with the right of free speech as well as
                      with political rights. l\eed, J., who spoke for the
                      majority obHerved:
                                  "Tho interference with free cxpreSBion
                            has to be seen in comparison with the require-
                            ml'nts of orderly management of administra-
                             tive personnel. ....... _.,,We accept appellant's
                             contention that the nature of political rights
                             reserved to the people are involved. The
                             righ~ claimed as inviolate may be stated as
                             the right.of a citizen to aot as a party official
                             or worker to further his own political views.
                             Thus we h11.ve a measure of interference by
                             the Hatch Act and the Rules with what other-
                              wise would be the freedom of the civil servant
                              under the .First Amendment. And, if we look
                              upon due process as a guarantee of freedom in
                              those fields, there is a corresponding impair-
                              ment of that right under the Fifth Amend-
                              ment .......... ,_ .... We do not find persuation in
                              appellants' argument that such activities
                              during free time are not subject to regulation
                              even though admittedly politieal activitos
                              cannot be indulged in during working hours.
                               The influence of politieal activity by gc,vern-
                               rnent employees, if evil in its effects on tho
                         (I) 91 Law. Ed. 75·1, 330 t..:.S. 75.
                                                                                     -
                                                       .. "
     '
3S.C.R.           SUPREME COURT REPORTS              377
                                  '
       service, the employees or people dealing with                1962
       them, is hardly less so because that activity          Kameshwar Prasad
                                                                      v.
       takes place after hours ............ It is accepted    The State of Blha•
       constitutional doctrine that these fundamental
       human rights are not absolutes ............ The           Ayyanzar J.
       essential rights of the First Amendment are
       subject to the elemental need for O!der with·
       out which the guarantees of civil rights to
       others· would be a mockery".
Mr. Sen also referred us to Mc Auliffe v. New
Bedford ( ') which is cited at p.791 in 91 Law. Ed.
in support of the position that servants of Govern-
ment formed a class and that conditions of service
imposed upon them which are reasonable and
necessmy to ensure efficiency and discipline cannot
be questioned on the ground of their contravening
any constitutional guarantees. Mr. Sen drew our
attention in particular to the following passage in
the judgment of-Holmes, J. :
             "There is nothing in the Constitution or
       the statute to prevent the city from attaching
       obedience to this rule as a condition to the
       office of policeman, and making it part of the
       good conduct required. The petitioner may
       have a constitutional right to talk polities,
       but he has no constitutional right to be a
       policeman. There are few employments for
       hire in which the servant does not agree to
       suspend his constitutional right of free speech,
       as well as of idleness, by the implied terms of
       his contract. The servant c1mnot complain,
       as he takes the employment on the terms
       which are offered him. On the same principle,
       the city may impose any reasonable condition
       upon holding offices within its control. This
     · condition seems to us reasonable, if that be a
       question open to revision here (The Police
       Regulation prohibiting mem hers of the depart-
   ( I)   (1892) 155 Mass. 216.
                     :ns SUPREME COURT REPORTS (1962] SUPP.
      1961
                             ment from soliciting money etc. for political
        ..
KtJmtshwar Pr"•ad
Thi Stu1 of Billi"
                             purposes)" .
                             As regards t hesc decisions of t.he American
  ..,_,.,,,., J      Courts, it should be borne in mind that though the
                     First Amendment to the Constitution of the United
                     State reading "Congress shall make no law .........
                     abridging the freedom of speech ......... " appears to
                     confer no power on the Congress to impose any
                     l'<'Striction on the exercise of the guaranteed right,
                     ~till it has always been u11derstood that the free-
                     dom guaranteed is subject to the police power-the
                     scop:• of which however has not been ddined with
                     precision or uniformly. It is on the basis of the
                     police power to abridge that freedom that the cu118ti-
                     tutional validity of law~ penalising libels, and those
                     relating to sedition, or to obscene publicatio11s etc.,
                     has been sustained. The resultant flexibilit.y of the
                     restrictions that could be validly jmposPd renders
                     the American deci;.io11s inapplicable to and without
                     mnst use for resolving the que~tions arising under
                     Art. 19('l)(a) or (b) of onr Constitntion wherein the
                     ground-; on which limitations might be placed on
                     the guaranteed right are set out with definiteness
                     and precision.
                             Learned Counsel iavited our attention also to
                     the decision of this Court in BrJ/11.kotaiah v. Union
                     of India(') to a Rimilar effect. But it must how-
                     ever, be noted that in Balakotaiah's case the
                     validity of the rule wa.s not challenged.
                             In further support of his submis8ion that the
                     fre•cdoms guaranteed to citizens by Art. J 9 c:annot
                     in their very nature, be applied to those who are
                     employed in governmt-nt St>rvicc our attention was
                     invited to sub-els. (d), (c) and (g) of d. (1). It was
                     said tha.t a Government servant who wa.8 post~d to
                     a partieular place could obviously not cxercisP tho
                     freedom to move throughout the t·;rritory of India
                     and similarly, his right to reside and settle in any
                     part of India could be said t.o be violated by his
                        (I) {1958] S. C. R.I05i.
 3 S.C.R.    SUPREME COURT REPORTS                 379
  being posted to any particular place. Similarly,               196%
   so long as he was in government service he would       Kameshwar Prasai
   not be entitled to practise any profession or trade            v.
   and it was therefore urged that to hold that these     The State of Bihar
   freedoms guaranteed under Art.. 19 were applicable
                                                             Ayyangar J,
   to government servants would render public service
   or administration impossible. This line of argu-
   ment, however, does not take into account the
 · limitations which might be imposed on the exercise
   of these rights by els. (5) and (6) under which res-
   trictions on the exercise of the rights conferred
   by sub-els. (d) and (g) may be imposed if reasonable
   in the interest of the general public.
          In this connection he laid stress on the fact
   that special provision had been made in regard to
   Service under the State in some of th\) Artic]es·in
  Part III-such as for instance Arts. 15, 16 and
   18(3) and (4)-and he desired us therefrom to
  draw tho inference that the other Articles in which
  there was no specific reference to Government
  servants were inapplicable to them. He realised
  however, that the implication arising from Art. 33
  would run counter to this line of argument but as
  regards this Article his submission was that it was
  concerned solely to save Army Regulations . which
  permitted detention in a manner which would
  not be countenanced by Art. 22 of the Constitution.
  We find ourselves unable to accept the argument
   that the Constitution excludes ·Government ser-
  vants as a class from the protection of the several
  rights guaranteed by the several Articles in Part
  III save in those cases where such persons were
  specifically named.
         In our opinion, this argument even if other-
  wise possible, has to be replll!ed in view of the
  terms of Art. 33. That Article selects two of the
  Services under the State-members oflthe armed
  forces charged with the maintenance of public order
  and saves the rules prescribing the conditions of
  service in regard to them-from invalidity on the
. ground of violation of a.ny of the funda.menta.l
                     380 SUPREME COURT REPORTs [1962) SUPP.
      J96Z           rights guaranteed by Part III and also d<>fines the
E011Ushwar Prasad    purpose for which ~uch abrogation or restriction
        v.           might take place, this being limited to ensure the
Tiu Stat1 of Bihar
                     prop!Jr di~charge of duties and the maintenanco of
   AJ;·angar J.      discipline among th('m. The Article having thus
                     selected the Services mem hers of which might Le
                     deprived of the bcndlt of the fundamental rights
                     guaranteed to other persons and citizens and also
                      having prescribed tho limits within which such
                      rPStrictions or abrogation might take r)ace, we
                      congider that other classes of 5ervants o Govern·
                      mcnt in common with other persons and other citi-
                      zens of t.hc eountry cannot Le excluded from the
                      protection of the rights guaranteed by Part HI by
                      reason merely of their br.ing Government servants
                      artd the nature and inri<lenta of th\) dnties which
                      they have to diecharge in that capacity might ncce-
                      ssarilv involve restrictions of certain freedoms a8
                      we have pointed out in relation to Art. 19 ( l) (c J
                      and (g ).
                              The first question that falls to be considered
                       is whether tho right to mako a "demonstration"
                       is covered by e·1thcr or both of the two freedoms
                       guaranteed by Art. l!J(l)(a) and 19(l)(b). A "elem·
                       onstratio11" is dcfinrd in tl1e Concise Oxford Dictil1·
                       nary as "an outward exhibition of feeling, as an
                       exhibitio11 of opinion on political or other question
                       especially a public meeting or procession". In
                       Webster it is defined as "a public exhibition by a
                        party, sect or society......... as by a parade or
                        mass-meeting". Without going very much into
                        the niceties of language it might be broadly stated
                        that a d1•monstration is a visible mauifcstation of
                        the feelings or sentiments of an individual or a
                        group. It is thus a. communication of one"s ideas
                        to others to whom it is intended to be conH•ycd.
                        It is in effeot therefore a form of Hpecch or of
                        expressiotl, because speech need not be vocal since
                        signs made by a dumb person would also be a form
                         of speech. It ha.a however to be recognised that
     3 S.C.R. SUPREME COURT REPORTS                      381
      the argument before us is confined to the rule pro-              196B
      hibiting demonstration which is a form of speech          Kameahwar Prasad
      and expression or of a mnre assembly and speeches                  v.
    · therein and not other forms of demonstration              Tiu Stat11 of Bihar
      which do not fall within the content of Art. l.9(l)(a)       Ayyangar J.
      or 19(l)(b). A demonstration might take the form
      of an assembly and even then the intention is to
      convey to the person or authority to whom the
      communication is intended the feelings of the group
      which assembles. It necessarily follows that there
      are forms of demonstration which would fall within
      the freedbms gu'1rante<Jd by Art. 19( 1)(a) and· 19( l)
      (b). It is needless to add that from the very
      nature of things a demonstration may take various
      forms; It may be noisy and disorderly, for instance
      stone-throwing by a crowd may be cit-,d as. an
      example of a violent and disorderly demonstration
      and this would not obviously be within Art.
      19(l)(a) or (b). It can equally be peaceful and
      orderly such ·as happens when the members of the
      group merely wear some badge drawing attention
      to their grievances.
            If thus particular forms of demonstration
      fall within the scope of Art. 19(l)(a) or 19(l)(b),
      the next question is whether r. 4-A, in so far as
      it lays an embargo on any form of demonstration for
      the redress of the grievances of Government em-
      ployees, could be sustained as falling within the
-     scope of Art. 19(2) and (3).
            These clauses run:
                  "19. (2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of
            clause (1) shall affect the operation of any
            existing law, or prevent the State from mak-
            ing any fa w, in so far as such law imposes
            reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the
            right conferred by the said sub-clause in the
            interests of the security of the State, friendly
            relatfons with foreign States, public order,
            decency or morality, or in relation to
                  '               '               '
                      38~   SUPRE:\iE COCRT REPORTS [1962] SUPP.
       1962
                                contempt of court., <lcfamatio11 or incitement to
Kamts!ztcar Prasud              an offence.
        v.
Tht Stal< of Billa•
                                       (.'l) ~othing in sub·clause (h) of the said
                                clause shall affi>et the opemtion of any exis-
   Ayyongar J,                  ~ing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
                                the State from making any law imposing,
                                in the interests of public order, reasonabfo
                                restrictions on the cxerciso of tho right con-
                                ferred by the said sub·clause."
                       The learned Judges of the High Court have, as
                       stated earlier, ·upheld the validity of the rule hv
                       considering them as roasonable rPstrictiohs in t.h·e
                       interest of public order. Tn coming tot.his co1wl11-
                       sion the learned Judges of the High Court
                       did not have the benefit of the exposition
                       of the meaning of the expression "in the int Nest
                       of public order" in these two clauses by thiR Court
                       in Snperi111e11dent, Central Prison, Jiutthyarh v.
                       Ram }rfanolwr Lohio ('). Speaking for the Court
                       Subba Rao, ,J., summarised his co11cluHion on tlrn
                       point in these terms:
                                       "Public order (Art. 19(2) and (!l)) is syno.
                                nymous with public safety and tranquillity.
                               It is tho absence of disorder involving breach-
                               es of local significance in contradistinctfon
                               to national upheavals such as revolution,
                               civil strike, war affecting the security of the
                               Stat1""
                      The learned Judge further stated that in order that
                      a legislation may be "in the interests of public
                                                                                      -
                      order" there must he a proximate and reasonable
                      nexus bP.twe!'n the nature of the speech prohibited
                      and public ordAr. The learned .T urlge reject<'d tho
                      argument that the phra~n "in the interests of public
                      order" which is wider than the words "for the
                      maintenance of public or1ler" which were found in
                      th<> Article a• originally cnai·ted-thNeby sanctioned
                      the enactment of ii law which reHtricted the right
                      merely because the Hpcech had a tendency however
                         (I) [19'l0) 2 S.C.R. 82J.
l
         3 S.C.R.    SUPREME COURT REPORTS                  383

          remote to disturb 'public order. The connection has             1962
          to be intimate, real and rational. The validity of        Kameshwar Prasad
          the rule now impugned has to 1le judged with                      v.
          reference to tests here propounded.                       The Stale of Bihar

                If one had to consider the propriety of the            Ayyangar J.
          rule as one int.ended to. ensure proper discipline
          a part from the limitations on law :making, in a
          Government servaut and in the context of the other
         provisions made for the making ofrepresentations and
        . for the redress of services, grievances, and apart from
          the limitiations imposed by the Constitution there
           could be very little doubt nor would it be even open
          to argument that the rule now impugned was Loth
          reasonable and calculated to ensure discipline in the·
          Services and in that sense conducive to ensure effi-
          ciency in the Service. Based on this aspect of the
          function of the rule the argument as regards Art.19(2)
          & (3) was put on a twofold basis: (1) that the main-
          tenance of public order was directly dependent
          upon the existence of a body of Government ser-
          vants who were themselves subject to strict dis-
          cipline. In other words, the maintenance of dis-
          cipline among Government servants not only contri-
          buted to the maintenance ofpublic order but· was
          a sine qua Mn of public order. (2) The other aspect
          in which it was presented was the negative of the
          one just now mentioned that if Government ser-
          vants were ill-disciplined and were themselves to

-         agitate in a disorderly manner for the redress of
          their service grievances, this must lead to a demo-
          ralisation of the public and would be reflected in
          the disappearance of public order..
                We find ourselves unable to uphold this sub·
          mission on behalf uf t.he State. In the first place
          we are not here concerned with any rule for ensur-
          ing disciplin~ among the police, which is the arm of
          the law primarily charged with the maintenance of
          public order. 'l'hc threat to public order should
          therefore arise from the nature of the demonstration
          prohibited. No doubt, ff the rule were so fral)'.leq
    '
                       384 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [1962] SUPP.
       • 96Z
                       as to single out those types of demonstration which
Ko~1hwar Pra1ad
                       were likely to lead to a distnrhance of public tran.
        v.             qnillity or which would fall under the other limiting
Tht Stalt of Bi/111'
                       criteria specified in Art. 19(2) the validity of the
   A»angar J.          rule could have been sustained. The vice of the
                       rule, in our opinion, consists in this that it. lays a
                       ban on overy type of demonstration- bi> the Harne
                       however innocent and however incapable of causing
                       a breach of public tranquillity and does not confine
                       itself to those forms of demonstrations which
                       might lead to that result.
                              Learned Counsel for the respondent and those
                       who supported the validity of the rule could not
                       suggest that on the language of the rule as it
                       stood, it was poBBible to read it as to separate the
                       legal from the unconstitutional portion of the provi-
                       sion. As no suoh B<>paration is possible the <'ntire
                       rule has to be struck down as uneonstitutional.
                              \Ve have rejected the broad contention that
                       persons in the servicn of government form a class
                        apart to whom the rights guaranfre<l by Part III
                       do not, in general, apply. By aee('pting the conten-
                       tion that the freedoms guarant.,ed by Part HI and
                       in pa.rticular those in Art. J\)( I)( a) apply to the
                        servants of government we should not be taken to
                        imply that in rolation to this class'Of citizen the
                        responsibility arising from oflicial position would
                        not by itsolf impose some limitntion~ on tho excr-
                        dse of their rights as citizens. For inst:rncc, s.!i4 (2)
                        of the Income- tax Act, 1922, enacts:
                                    "If a public servant discloses any parti-
                               culars contained in' anv such statement.,
                               return, accounts, docum,;nts, cvidcncc affi-
                               davit, deposition or record, ho shall be punish-
                               able with imprisonment which may extend to
                               six months, an<l shall alHo be liable to fine."
                        Section 128(1) of the Representat.icm of thn People
                        Act, 19!il, enjoins on every officer, clerk, agent etc.
                         who performs any duty in connection with tpe




                                                          •
         3 s.c.R. SUPREME couRT REPoR±s                      3s5
          recording or counting of votes at an election shall            W62
          maintain the secrecy of the voting and shall not
          communicate to any person any information calcu-
                                                                        --
                                                                   Kameshwar Prasad
                                                                          v.
          lated to violate such secrecy, and visits the breach     Tbe State of Bihar
          of the rule by punishment with imprisonment for a
        term which inay extend to three months or with fine.          AyyangarJ.
         It cannot be contended that provisions on these or
         similar lines in these or other enactniim ts restrict
  ..'
,;-
         the freedom of the officers etc. merely because they
         are prohibited from communicating information
         which comes to them in the course of the performa-
         nce of the duties of their office, to othtrs. The
         information having been obtained by them 'in the
         course of their duties by virtue of their official
         position, rules or provisions of the law prescribing
         the circumstances in which alone such information
         might be given out or used do not infringe the right
         of freedom of speech as is guaranteed by the Con·
         stitution.
                We would therefore allow the appepl in part
        and grant the appellants a declaration that r. 4A in
        the form in which it now stands prohibiting "any
        form of demonstration" is violative of the appel-
        lants' rights under Art. 19(1)(a) & (b) and should
        therefore be stuck down. It is only necessary to
        add that the rule, in so far as it prohibits a strike,
        cannot be struck J.own since there is no fundamen-

-       tal right · to resort to a strike. As the appel-
        lants have succeeded only in part, there will be na
        order as to costs in the appeal.
                                   Appeal allowed in part.
